Triplet Loss for Knowledge Distillation
Hideki Oki, Motoshi Abe, Jyunichi Miyao and Takio Kurita
Department of Information Engineering
Hiroshima University
Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan
{hidebon9105, i13abemotoshi}@gmail.com, {miyao, tkurita}@hiroshima-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, deep learning has spread rapidly,
and deeper, larger models have been proposed. However, the
calculation cost becomes enormous as the size of the models
becomes larger. Various techniques for compressing the size of
the models have been proposed to improve performance while
reducing computational costs. One of the methods to compress
the size of the models is knowledge distillation (KD). Knowledge
distillation is a technique for transferring knowledge of deep
or ensemble models with many parameters (teacher model) to
smaller shallow models (student model). Since the purpose of
knowledge distillation is to increase the similarity between the
teacher model and the student model, we propose to introduce the
concept of metric learning into knowledge distillation to make the
student model closer to the teacher model using pairs or triplets
of the training samples. In metric learning, the researchers are
developing the methods to build a model that can increase
the similarity of outputs for similar samples. Metric learning
aims at reducing the distance between similar and increasing
the distance between dissimilar. The functionality of the metric
learning to reduce the differences between similar outputs can
be used for the knowledge distillation to reduce the differences
between the outputs of the teacher model and the student model.
Since the outputs of the teacher model for different objects are
usually different, the student model needs to distinguish them.
We think that metric learning can clarify the difference between
the different outputs, and the performance of the student model
could be improved. We have performed experiments to compare
the proposed method with state-of-the-art knowledge distillation
methods. The results show that the student model obtained by the
proposed method gives higher performance than the conventional
knowledge distillation methods.
Index Terms—Convolutional Neural Network, Metric Learn-
ing, triplet loss, knowledge distillation
I. INTRODUCTION
After the deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) pro-
posed by Krizhevsky et al. [1] won the ILSVRC 2012 with
higher score than the conventional methods, it became very
popular for image classiﬁcation and object recognition. Later,
with the increase in computer performance, deeper and larger
models such as VGG [2] and ResNet [3] were proposed. It is
believed that deeper models with more parameters perform
better performance than the shallow models. However, the
calculation cost becomes enormous as the size of the models
becomes larger. Various techniques for compressing the size
of the models have been proposed to improve performance
while reducing computational costs.
One of the methods to compress the size of the models
is knowledge distillation (KD). Knowledge distillation is a
technique for transferring knowledge of deep or ensemble
models with many parameters (teacher model) to smaller
shallow models (student model). Speciﬁcally, the learning of
the student model is accelerated by using the output of the
trained teacher model. For example, Ba et al. [4] used the
square error between the teacher model and the student model
as the student model loss. Hinton et al. [5] used the KL-
divergence of the softmax output of both models as the loss
of the student model.
In knowledge distillation, the knowledge of the teacher
model is transferred to the student model by making the
student model learn to imitate the output of the teacher model.
In other words, knowledge distillation can also be considered
as a method for increasing the similarity between the outputs
of the teacher model and the student model. So, in this
paper, we propose to introduce metric learning into knowledge
distillation.
In metric learning, the researchers are developing the meth-
ods to build a model that can increase the similarity of outputs
for similar samples. Representative methods for deep metric
learning include the Siamese Network [6]–[8] and the Triplet
Network [9], [10]. These are learned so that the Euclidean
distance between outputs for similar samples is reduced. In
addition, learning is performed so that the Euclidean distance
between outputs for dissimilar samples becomes large. That is,
there is a function to clarify the difference between dissimilar
outputs. The model will try to get the same output for the same
object, and will be able to clearly distinguish the difference
between different objects. With this feature, the metric learning
model has performed extremely well in areas such as face
veriﬁcation and human re-identiﬁcation.
In this paper, we propose to introduce this metric learning
concept into knowledge distillation. The functionality of the
metric learning to reduce the differences between similar
outputs can be used for the knowledge distillation to reduce
the differences between the outputs of the teacher model and
the student model. Since the outputs of the teacher model
for different objects are usually different, the student model
needs to distinguish them. We think that metric learning can
clarify the difference between the different outputs, and the
performance of the student model could be improved.
The effectiveness of the proposed approach is experimen-
tally conﬁrmed for image classiﬁcation tasks. Experimental
results show that our method dramatically improves the per-
arXiv:2004.08116v1  [cs.LG]  17 Apr 2020


formance of the student model. Also, we have performed
experiments to compare the proposed method with state-
of-the-art knowledge distillation methods. The results show
that the student model obtained by the proposed method
gives higher performance than the conventional knowledge
distillation methods.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Deep Convolutional Neural Network
The deep CNN has been proven to be effective and has been
applied many applications such as for image classiﬁcation [1],
[3], object detection [11], image segmentation [12] and so on.
The computation within the convolution layers is regarded
as a ﬁltering process of the input image as
f (c)
p,q = h(
convy−1
X
r=0
convx−1
X
s=0
w(c)
r,sf (c−1)
p+r,q+s + b(c)) ,
(1)
where w(c)
r,s is the weight of the neuron indexed as (r, s) in
the c-th convolution layer and b(c) is the bias of the c-th
convolution layer. The size of the convolution ﬁlter is given
as convx × convy. The activation function of each neuron
is denoted as h. Usually, pooling layers are added after the
convolution layers. The pooling layer performs downsampling
for reducing computational costs and enhancing against micro
position changes. Fully-connected layers like multi layer per-
ceptron is connected to the convolution layers which is used
to construct the classiﬁer.
B. Metric Learning
Metric learning is a method of learning embedding for
metric (Euclidean distance, cosine similarity, etc.). Metric
learning is applied to a wide range of tasks such as image
search, biometric authentication, and abnormality detection.
Fig. 1.
The structure of Siamese Network. The distance metric is learned
depending on the label lij given to each sample pair xi and xj.
A typical model for deep learning embedding is the Siamese
Neural Network [6]–[8]. The Siamese Network consists of two
identical networks joined at their outputs. The two networks
extract feature vectors from two different samples. Usually, the
weights of the two networks are shared. The objective function
of the optimization for training the parameters of the networks
is deﬁned by using these extracted feature vectors as
E =
1
2|χ2|
X
(i,j)∈χ2
lij(Dij)2
+ (1 −lij)max(m −Dij, 0)2 ,
(2)
where Dij represents the distance between the pair of the
outputs f(xi) and f(xj) of each network for the sample pair
xi and xj. The distance Dij is deﬁned by
Dij = ||f(xi) −f(xj)||2 ,
(3)
where m is a parameter indicating the distance between
clusters and χ2 is an index set of sample pairs randomly
generated from the samples in the mini-batch. A label l is
assigned for each sample pair such that label is lij = 1 when
the pair i and j is similar and label is lij = 0 when the pair i
and j is dissimilar. The scheme of Siamese Network is shown
in Fig. 1.
After the training of Siamese Network, the distance be-
tween the outputs for dissimilar pair will be far while the
distance between the outputs for similar pair become close.
The Siamese Network can only consider the metric between
samples pairwise. For this reason, the Siamese Network have
to uniquely determine the concept of similarity. For example, if
there are two different male images, in the case of the concept
of gender, they should be judged to be similar. However, in the
case of the concept of individuals, they should be judged not
to be similar. It is difﬁcult to express these multiple concepts
in the Siamese Network.
Wang et al. [9], Hoffer et al. [10] proposed the Triplet
Network (Figure 2), an extension of the Siamese Network to
triplet-wise.
Fig. 2. The structure of Triplet Network. The distance metric is learned by
using three networks with the shared weights from triplet xa, xp and xn
which are called ”anchor”, ”positine”, and ”negative”. Learning progresses as
closer ”anchor-positive”, and keep away ”anchor-negative”.
Triplet Network is designed to learn embedding from a
triplet of samples called ”anchor”, ”positive” and ”negative”.
The triplet network learns embedding such that the distance
between ”anchor” xa and ”positve” xp is smaller than the
distance between ”anchor” xa and ”negative” xn. Various
losses have been proposed for the Triplet Network. The triplet
loss
E =
X
(a,p,n)∈Θ
max(0, m + ||f(xa) −f(xp)||2
2
−||f(xa) −f(xn)||2
2)
(4)
is generally used, where f(·) denotes the output of the model,
and m is a parameter indicating the distance between clusters.
Θ is an index set of ”anchor”, ”positive”, and ”negative”. The


triplet network learns so that the anchor-positive distance is
relatively closer than the anchor-negative distance. Therefore,
multiple similar concepts can be considered without depending
on one similar concept. Triplet Network can overcome the
drawbacks of Siamese Network.
C. Knowledge Distillation
Fig. 3.
The structure of conventional knowledge distillation. The student
model tries to mimic the teacher model.
Knowledge distillation is a technique for transferring knowl-
edge of deep or ensemble model with many parameters
(teacher model) to smaller shallow model (student model).
Various approaches have been proposed for transferring
knowledge.
Ba et al. [4] considered the difference between the input
vectors of the softmax activation function (logits) of the
teacher model and the student model as loss (Equation(5)),
and proposed to train the student model so that the feature
vectors of the student model got close to the teacher model
(BKD). The loss to measure the similarity between the teacher
model and the student model is deﬁned by the mean squared
errors between the feature vector t(·) of the teacher model and
the feature vector s(·) of the student model as
EBKD = 1
2
X
i∈χ
||t(xi) −s(xi)||2
2,
(5)
where χ is the set of training samples. As a result, the authors
found that the performance of the student model was higher
than the network trained by the student model alone. They
claimed that the uncertainty of the feature vectors of the
teacher model is useful for learning the student model.
Hinton et al. [5] proposed training the student model so
that the softmax outputs of the teacher model and the softmax
outputs (probability) of the student model are close (HKD).
They used the KL-divergence of the softmax outputs of both
models as the loss for training the student model. The loss
based on the KL-divergence is deﬁned as
EHKD =
X
i∈χ
KL(softmax(t(xi)
T
), softmax(s(xi)
T
)),
(6)
where softmax(·) is the softmax function, KL(·) is KL-
divergence between the softmax outputs of the teacher model
{pi} and the softmax outputs {qi} of the student model deﬁned
by
KL(p, q) =
X
i
pilog(pi
qi
) ,
(7)
and T is a temperature parameter. They argued that negative
values in logits could have a positive effect in some cases or
negative effect in some cases, on learning.
In recent years, various approaches have been proposed
for knowledge distillation. Park et al. [13] expressed the
relationship between the outputs of the teacher model as the
Euclidean distance between the two outputs, and transferred it
to the student model (RKD-D). They expressed the similarity
between the pair of the outputs t(xi) and t(xj) as
ψD(t(xi), t(xj)) =
||t(xi) −t(xj)||2
P
(xi,xj)∈χ2 ||t(xi) −t(xj)||2
,
(8)
where χ2 is a set of sample pairs randomly generated from the
samples in the mini-batch. They optimized the student model
by Huber loss so that the similarity between the outputs of the
student model and the similarity of the outputs of the teacher
model got closer. The loss function of RKD-D is deﬁned by
using the similarity ψD as
ERKD−D =
X
(xi,xj)∈χ2
l(ψD(t(xi), t(xj)), ψD(s(xi), s(xj))),
(9)
where
l(p, q) =

1
2(p −q)2
(|p −q| ≤1)
|p −q| −1
2
(otherwise)
(10)
is Huber loss.
They also used the cosine of the angle formed by the three
outputs as the similarity of the model outputs (RKD-A). The
cosine of the three outputs t(xi), t(xj), and t(xk) is deﬁned
by
ψ(tijk)
A
= cos ∠t(xi)t(xj)t(xk),
(11)
where
cos ∠t(xi)t(xj)t(xk) = ⟨e(tij), e(tkj)⟩
(12)
e(tij) =
t(xi) −t(xj)
||t(xi) −t(xj)||2
,
e(tkj) =
t(xk) −t(xj)
||t(xk) −t(xj)||2
.
(13)
Loss of RKD-A is also deﬁned by using Huber loss [14] as
ERKD−A =
X
(xi,xj,xk)∈χ3
l(ψ(tijk)
A
, ψ(sijk)
A
) ,
(14)
where χ3 is a set of triplet samples randomly generated from
the samples in the mini-batch.
They also argued that using both angles and Euclidean
distance for knowledge transfer would further improve the
performance of the student model (RKD-DA). The loss for
this case is deﬁned as
ERKD−DA = λRKD−DERKD−D + λRKD−AERKD−A ,
(15)
where λRKD−D and λRKD−A are the hyper-parameters.


Fig. 4. The summary of knowledge distillation methods in terms of the loss
function.
The pair-wise or triplet-wise similarity between the output
of the teacher model to the output of the student model is
considered in RKD-D, RKD-A, or RKD-DA while the point-
wise transfer was performed in the knowledge distillation
methods such as Ba’s KD [4] or Hinton’s KD [5]. Thus the
knowledge distillation methods such as RKD-D, RKD-A, or
RKD-DA succeeded in achieving top performance.
The loss using the output distribution of the teacher model
(soft target) can be used alone or combined with the loss
using the label of the original training data (hard target). The
combined loss can be deﬁned as
EKD = Ehard + λsoftEsoft,
(16)
where Ehard is hard target loss and Esoft is soft target loss.
In this case, a hyper-parameter λ is introduced to keep the
balance between the hard target and the soft target. It is also
possible to combine multiple soft target losses. For example,
in Park’s KD, they are λRKD−D and λRKD−A.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
Fig. 5. The structure of our method. The student model is optimized so that
its own output for sample xa and the output of the teacher model for sample
xa are closer. At the same time, the student model is optimized so that its
own output for sample xn which is the different classes in the soft target and
the output of the teacher model for sample xa are keeping away.
Previously proposed methods of knowledge distillation fo-
cused on minimizing the difference between the teacher model
and the student model in order to transfer knowledge of
the teacher model. For example, Ba et al. [4] considered
the difference in model output as loss and Hinton et al. [5]
considered the difference in model output distribution as loss.
In other words, they are solving the optimization problem
in which the similarity between the function of the teacher
model and the function of the student model is maximized.
There is a possibility that knowledge of the teacher model
can be transferred to the student model by using the metric
learning method to embed the neighboring relations of the
teacher model in the output space of the student model.
Triplet [10], one of the deep metric learning methods, is
a powerful method for learning similarity and dissimilarity
(Equation (4)). Triplet loss has a function to reduce the output
distance of ”anchor-positive” and a function to increase the
output distance of ”anchor-negative”. We propose to apply this
technique for knowledge distillation.
We deﬁne the triplet loss for knowledge transfer as
EourKD =
X
(a,n)∈Ω
max(0, m + ||t(xa) −s(xa)||2
2
−||t(xa) −s(xn)||2
2) ,
(17)
where t(·) is the output of the teacher model, s(·) is the output
of the student model, and m is the margin. Further, xa is
a training sample extracted at random, and xn is a sample
classiﬁed into a different class from xa in the case of a soft
target. Ωis the index set of each corresponding sample. So,
the output of the teacher model and the output of the student
model for the same sample are considered as ”anchor” and
”positive”, respectively. Also we consider the output of the
student model for samples of different classes in the case of
soft target as ”negative”. Since we are training the student
model, the weight of the teacher model is not updated. That
is, t(·) is treated as a constant during training process.
For our loss, there is a term that makes the outputs of the
teacher model and the student model closer. This is realized
by making the square error of the outputs of the teacher
model and the student model a loss. This is similar to Ba
et al. [4] proposed function. It is easy to deﬁne the loss by
using KL-divergence similar with Hinton et al. [5]. In addition,
there are terms that increase the distance between outputs of
different classes. In other words, in addition to the conven-
tional loss functions, it is possible to add a constraint that the
student model makes the outputs of other classes dissimilar.
This will allow the student model to clarify differences in
output between classes. We have shown experimentally that
this proposal contributed to the performance improvement of
the student model. We will also seek further performance
improvements in combination with other distillation losses.
IV. EXPERIMENT
We experimentally investigated the effectiveness of the
proposed method with the image classiﬁcation task. CIFAR-10
[15] and Tiny ImageNet [16] are used as datasets.
A. Experiments using CIFAR-10
CIFAR-10 is a dataset that includes color images of 10 kinds
of objects such as ”automobile” and ”dog.” The size of each
image in CIFAR-10 is 32 × 32. The numbers of the training
samples and the test samples are 50,000 and 10,000. We
conducted comparative experiments with Ba’s KD [4] (BKD),
Hinton’s KD [5] (HKD), and Park’s RKD-DA [13].
In the case of CIFAR-10, the 8-layers CNN model shown
in Table I was used as a teacher model, and the 5-layers CNN


TABLE I
MODEL STRUCTURES FOR CIFAR-10
student model(5 layers)
teacher model(8 layers)
conv1(channel:32, ﬁlter:3)
conv1(channel:32, ﬁlter:3)
max pooling(2*2)
batch normalization(32)
conv2(channel:32, ﬁlter:3)
max pooling(2*2)
max pooling(2*2)
conv2(channel:32, ﬁlter:3)
conv3(channel:64, ﬁlter:3)
batch normalization(32)
max pooling(2*2)
max pooling(2*2)
fully-connected(128)
conv3(channel:64, ﬁlter:3)
output(10)
batch normalization(64)
conv4(channel:64, ﬁlter:3)
batch normalization(64)
conv5(channel:128, ﬁlter:3)
batch normalization(128)
max pooling(2*2)
fully-connected(512)
dropout
fully-connected(128)
dropout
output(10)
model was used as a student model. The number of trainable
parameters of the student model is 161,130, and the number
of trainable parameters of the teacher model is 1,256,106. The
number of parameters in the student model is about 12.8% of
the number of parameters in the teacher model.
An activation function ReLU deﬁned by
h(x) = max(0, x)
(18)
is used for the outputs of each convolution layer and the
outputs of each fully-connected layer except for the last output
layer.
In the training, the optimization is done by using the
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with momentum. The learn-
ing rate of SGD is initially set at 0.01 and changed by multi-
plying 0.1 at every 100 epochs. The momentum parameter
is set to 0.9. We also introduced weight decay to prevent
over-learning. We set hard target loss as cross entropy with
softmax and combined it with soft target loss. In addition,
we introduced a parameter λ as shown in Equation (16) to
maintain the balance between hard target loss and soft target
loss. We set λBKD = 2, λHKD = 16, λRKD−D = 10,
λRKD−A = 20 and λoursKD = 2. The temperature parameter
of Hinton’s KD [5] was set to 4, and the hyper-parameter m
of triplet loss was set to 5.
TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR CIFAR-10
method
accuracy
Student model
74.66%
Ba’s KD
80.40%
Hinton’s KD
79.16%
RKD-DA
79.21%
Ours KD
81.14%
Teacher model
83.42%
The Table II shows the classiﬁcation accuracy of the student
model for test samples in each method. From the table, it can
be seen that in the case of CIFAR10, the proposed method
achieves higher performance than the other methods.
B. Experiments using Tiny ImageNet
Also, we have performed experiments using the Tiny Ima-
geNet dataset. Tiny ImageNet dataset includes color images of
200 kinds of objects. The image size is 64×64, and it has 500
train images and 50 test images per class. For the case of Tiny
ImageNet, VGG19 with batch normalization and VGG11 were
used as the teacher model and the student model, respectively.
The numbers of trainable parameters of the teacher model and
the student model are 46,028,808 and 35,213,896, respectively.
This means that the number of parameters of the student model
is about 76.5% of those of the teacher model. We conducted
comparative experiments with Ba’s KD [4] (BKD), Hinton’s
KD [5] (HKD), and Park’s RKD-DA [13].
The weights in the convolution layers were pre-trained by
using ImageNet, and they were used as the initial weights of
the training. Similarly, the SGD with momentum was used for
the optimization. The learning rate of SGD with momentum is
initially set at 0.001 and multiplied by 0.9 every 3 epochs. The
momentum parameter is set to 0.9. We also used mixup [17]
to prevent over-learning. Cross-entropy with softmax was used
as the hard target loss and was combined with the soft target
loss. Also, we introduced a parameter λ as shown in Equation
(16) to maintain the balance between hard target loss and soft
target loss. We set λBKD = 2, λHKD = 16, λRKD−D = 25,
λRKD−A = 50 and λoursKD = 2. The temperature parameter
of Hinton’s KD [5] was set to 4, and the parameter m of triplet
loss was set to 5.
TABLE III
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR TINY IMAGENET
method
accuracy
Student model
58.63%
Ba’s KD
59.80%
Hinton’s KD
59.80%
RKD-DA
59.73%
Ours KD
60.00%
Teacher model
63.17%
Table III shows the classiﬁcation accuracy of the student
model for the Tiny ImageNet dataset in each method. The
results show that the proposed method gives slightly better
performance than the other methods.
C. Experiments on the combined loss
Park et al. [13] succeeded in achieving even higher perfor-
mance by combining their method (RKD-DA) with Hinton’s
method [5]. Here we investigate the effectiveness of the
combination of different loss functions. The loss of each
method is combined with Hinton’s loss as
E = Ehard + λsoftEsoft + λHKDEHKD
(19)


. Depending on the datasets CIFAR-10 and Tiny ImageNet, the
same network architectures with the previous subsections were
used. The student models were trained, and the classiﬁcation
performances of the trained student models are calculated.
TABLE IV
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY FOR COMBINED WITH HKD
method
CIFAR10
Tiny ImageNet
Student model
74.66%
58.63%
Hinton’s KD
79.16%
59.80%
Ba’s KD + HKD
80.33%
60.19%
RKD-DA + HKD
79.65%
59.89%
Ours KD + HKD
80.93%
60.62%
Teacher model
83.42%
63.17%
Table IV shows the classiﬁcation performance of the test
samples for each dataset. From this table IV, it is noticed that
the classiﬁcation accuracy of Park’s KD [13] was improved by
combining with the Hinton’s loss for CIFAR-10 dataset, but
the classiﬁcation accuracy of the proposed method and Ba’s
KD [4] was not improved. However the proposed method still
gives the best classiﬁcation accuracy. For the Tiny ImageNet
dataset, all methods showed an increase in the classiﬁcation
accuracy when they are combined with Hinton’s KD [5]. Also,
the proposed method gives the best accuracy for this case.
Also we consider a combination with Park’s KD [13].
We investigate the effects of combining RKD-DA loss with
our loss and we investigate combinations with both Hinton’s
KD [5] and RKD-DA. Depending on the datasets CIFAR-10
and Tiny ImageNet, the same network architectures with the
previous subsections were used.
TABLE V
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY OF OURS KD FOR COMBINED WITH
RKD-DA
method
CIFAR10
Tiny ImageNet
Student model
74.66%
58.63%
RKD-DA
79.21%
59.73%
ours KD
81.14%
60.00%
ours KD + RKD-DA
80.17%
60.32%
ours KD + HKD + RKD-DA
80.30%
60.65%
Teacher model
83.42%
63.17%
Table V shows the classiﬁcation accuracy of the student
model in each method. In the case of the CIFAR10 dataset, no
performance improvement was obtained even when combined
with RKD-DA. In the case of the Tiny ImageNet dataset,
we succeeded in improving performance by combining it
with RKD-DA. In addition, using both RKD-DA and Hin-
ton’s KD in combination with our method resulted in further
performance improvements. Although the combination of our
method and Hinton’s KD had improved the performance, the
combination of both Hinton’s KD and RKD-DA achieved even
higher performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we applied the concept of metric learning to
knowledge distillation. By introducing the concept of metric
learning, we transfer not only the teacher model knowledge
to be imitated but also the knowledge that should not be
imitated to the student model. Our experimental results showed
that this approach can signiﬁcantly improve the performance
of the student model. Also, the combination with Hinton’s
KD [5] and Park’s KD [13] succeeded in giving the student
model even better performance. This fact indicates that metric
learning contributes to transferring the knowledge of the
teacher model to the student model.
On the other hand, the concept of metric learning, such
as Triplet loss, has a problem with hard sampling. In hard
sampling, we intentionally select samples that are difﬁcult to
learn to get consistent training results. If you use only samples
that are easy to learn, the performance of learning decreases.
In the proposed approach, it is necessary to use hard sampling
because the proposed method is based on the Triplet loss.
Thus we have to introduce a way to address this problem, like
Hermans et al. [18].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 16K00239.
REFERENCES
[1] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton.
Imagenet
classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks.
In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 1097–1105, 2012.
[2] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
Very deep convolu-
tional networks for large-scale image recognition.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[3] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep
residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778,
2016.
[4] Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to be deep? In
Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2654–2662,
2014.
[5] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge
in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
[6] Jane Bromley, Isabelle Guyon, Yann LeCun, Eduard S¨ackinger, and
Roopak Shah. Signature veriﬁcation using a” siamese” time delay neural
network. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
737–744, 1994.
[7] Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, Yann LeCun, et al. Learning a similarity
metric discriminatively, with application to face veriﬁcation. In CVPR
(1), pages 539–546, 2005.
[8] Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction
by learning an invariant mapping.
In 2006 IEEE Computer Society
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06),
volume 2, pages 1735–1742. IEEE, 2006.
[9] Jiang Wang, Yang Song, Thomas Leung, Chuck Rosenberg, Jingbin
Wang, James Philbin, Bo Chen, and Ying Wu. Learning ﬁne-grained
image similarity with deep ranking.
In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1386–
1393, 2014.
[10] Elad Hoffer and Nir Ailon. Deep metric learning using triplet network.
In International Workshop on Similarity-Based Pattern Recognition,
pages 84–92. Springer, 2015.
[11] Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Doll´ar, and Ross Girshick. Mask
r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
vision, pages 2961–2969, 2017.


[12] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convo-
lutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In International
Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted inter-
vention, pages 234–241. Springer, 2015.
[13] Wonpyo Park, Dongju Kim, Yan Lu, and Minsu Cho.
Relational
knowledge distillation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3967–3976, 2019.
[14] Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. In Break-
throughs in statistics, pages 492–518. Springer, 1992.
[15] Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images. Citeseer, 2009.
[16] Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS
231N, 2015.
[17] Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-
Paz.
mixup: Beyond empirical risk minimization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.09412, 2017.
[18] Alexander Hermans, Lucas Beyer, and Bastian Leibe. In defense of the
triplet loss for person re-identiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07737,
2017.
