Channel Distillation: Channel-Wise Attention for
Knowledge Distillation
Zaida Zhou1
Chaoran Zhuge1
Xinwei Guan1
Wen Liu2
1University of Science and Technology of China
2Sun Yat-sen University
{zdzhou01, zgcr, xinaruto}@mail.ustc.edu.cn
liuw256@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract
Knowledge distillation is to transfer the knowledge from the data learned by the
teacher network to the student network, so that the student has the advantage of
less parameters and less calculations, and the accuracy is close to the teacher.
In this paper, we propose a new distillation method, which contains two transfer
distillation strategies and a loss decay strategy. The ﬁrst transfer strategy is based on
channel-wise attention, called Channel Distillation (CD). CD transfers the channel
information from the teacher to the student. The second is Guided Knowledge
Distillation (GKD). Unlike Knowledge Distillation (KD), which allows the student
to mimic each sample’s prediction distribution of the teacher, GKD only enables
the student to mimic the correct output of the teacher. The last part is Early Decay
Teacher (EDT). During the training process, we gradually decay the weight of
the distillation loss. The purpose is to enable the student to gradually control
the optimization rather than the teacher. Our proposed method is evaluated on
ImageNet and CIFAR100. On ImageNet, we achieve 27.68% of top-1 error with
ResNet18, which outperforms state-of-the-art methods. On CIFAR100, we achieve
surprising result that the student outperforms the teacher. Code is available at
https://github.com/zhouzaida/channel-distillation.
1
Introduction
In recent years, deep learning has made great progress in computer vision and natural language
processing. The emergence of the convolutional neural network AlexNet [1] has caught the attention
of many scholars, and it far exceeds traditional algorithms in image classiﬁcation. Researches on
convolutional neural networks have found that a deeper network can extract more abstract semantic
information, so the neural network becomes deeper and deeper, and the network’s representation
ability is getting better and better. However, the deeper network will be difﬁcult to converge, and the
gradient disappears when it performs back-propagation [22, 23]. The proposal of the ResNet [2] and
the BN [3] have solved this problem to a certain extent, but a large number of network parameters and
calculations are unacceptable on the mobile terminal for real-time inference. Knowledge distillation
is a universal solution for model compression. Generally, we ﬁrst train a large teacher network,
and then use the teacher network to supervise the training of small student network, thereby the
performance of the student network is improved and the student network can be served at a lower
cost.
In order to achieve a better knowledge distillation, many methods have been proposed in [4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 14, 20]. Geoffrey Hinton et al. [13] used Knowledge Distillation (KD) loss to minimize the
difference between the teacher’s output distribution and the student’s output distribution. Adriana
Romero et al. [14] used L2 loss to make the feature map of the student simulate the feature map of
the teacher. Byeongho Heo et al. [7] utilized the decision boundary of the teacher to guide the student.
However, these methods still cannot transfer the knowledge effectively. Although the student obtains
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2006.01683v1  [cs.LG]  2 Jun 2020


the knowledge transferred by the teacher, there is still a certain gap in performance between them, as
shown in Figure 1. There are three main reasons for this. One is that the knowledge transferred from
the teacher is not good enough, and the student cannot accurately learn the essential information from
the teacher. Second is that the prediction of the teacher is not completely correct, during training, if
the student makes a decision with reference to the decisive result of the teacher, the poor output of
the teacher will have a bad inﬂuence on the student instead. Additionally, there is a margin between
the teacher and the student since they have different structure, which will make the student unable to
ﬁnd its own optimization space if we always let the teacher supervise it.
To solve the three problems mentioned above, inspired by [10, 11, 12, 18], we propose a novel method
of knowledge distillation. We transfer the knowledge to the student by the method of Channel-Wise
Distillation (CD), which is a special attention we will explain in detail in Section 3.1, so that the
student can extract feature more effectively. At the same time, to avoid the negative impact of the
teacher on the student, we propose Guided Knowledge Distillation (GKD) based on KD, only using
the correct output of the teacher as knowledge to guide the student, that is, only when the teacher
predicts correctly, the student simulate the output of the teacher. In addition, we also propose Early
Decay Teacher (EDT) to reduce the proportion of distillation loss during the training, making sure
the student is able to ﬁnd its own optimization space.
To summarize, the contributions of our work can be listed as follows:
• Different to other knowledge distillations, we let the student learn the teacher’s ability to
recognize channel representation
• We only calculate the loss of samples classiﬁed correctly by the teacher to guide the student
• The supervision on student will be gradually decreased in late period of the training process
• We proved our method has reached state-of-the-art performance, which is illustrated in
Table 3
2
Related Work
Knowledge distillation methods. Caruana et al. [27] ﬁrst proposed a method to compress the
functions learned by the large model into smaller and faster model which can match the results of
the larger model. Later, Hinton et al. [13] applied this technology to help the teacher transfer the
output distribution as a form of knowledge to the student, so that the output distribution of the student
was close to the teacher. Compared with directly use of the one-hot hard label, imitating this soft
distribution can also enable the student to learn more inter-class information. Adriana Romero et al.
[14] found that such kind of constraint is not sufﬁcient at the label level. The deeper the network, the
harder it is to transmit the ﬁnal layer of supervisory signals back to the front. His FitNets [14] added
some supervisory signals in the middle of the network, which utilized hint training to constrain that
the output of the middle layer of two models should be as close as possible. [8, 21] focus on batch
dimensions and reduce spatial information, using a method to pass the correlation between samples,
similar to gram matrix (Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016) [19]. Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodaki
proposed Attention Transfer [9], which uses spatial-attention to transfer the attention information of
the teacher model to the student model in the intermediate layer. Yim et al. [5] deﬁned a Flow of
Solution Procedure (FSP) matrix of the feature map between the middle layer, which represents the
way that the teacher processes the information between the two layers, and this processing way is
passed to the student by distillation.
Attention. The attention mechanism stems from the study of human vision. Owing to the bottleneck
of information processing, humans will selectively pay attention to part of the information while
ignoring others. In the ﬁeld of computer vision, attention mechanisms are put in place to perform
visual information processing [28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33], such as local image feature extraction, saliency
detection, sliding window method, etc. All of them can be considered as attention mechanisms.
Attention mechanism is typically used in the processing of feature maps. CBAM [15], proposed
by Sanghyun Woo et al., applies attention on both channel and spatial position in the feature map
which considers global average pooling (GAP) and global max pooling (GMP) information. Jie Hu et
al. proposed SE-NET [10], which utilizes GAP and fully connected (FC) to obtain the weight on
the channel. SKNET [16] convolves the feature map with 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 kernels respectively, and
then obtains the weight of the two convolution results through GAP to do attention. SGE-NET [17]
2


Figure 1: The different distillation methods with Resnet34 as the teacher and Resnet18 as the
student. Obviously, the accuracy of the teacher is 73.27%, which is about 2% higher than the current
distillation method.
groups the channels of the feature map and uses GAP in each group to get a global vector, g. Next,
g is utilized to multiply the original feature map by position-wise dot, and then the normalization
operation is performed to get mask a. Finally, sigmoid(a) is used to do attention.
Early stop. Most of the research on early stop is limited to a single model. The researchers observed
that when the model is over-trained, poor generalization will occur. This phenomenon is called
network overﬁtting, therefore stopping training ahead of time is a general technique for solving the
poor generalization of the model [22]. Maren Mahsereci et al. [23] proposed a novel early stopping
criterion based on fast-to-compute local statistics of the computed gradients. Rich Caruana [26] also
veriﬁed that early stopping combined with back-propagation is so effective that large networks can be
trained without signiﬁcant overﬁtting. Although early stopping technology is ued infrequently in the
ﬁeld of distillation, Jang Hyun Cho and Bharath Hariharan [24] had observed a phenomenon in their
experiments that not always teachers with better performance can teach students better. When the
gap (network structure, network capacity) between the teacher and the student is huge, the student
isn’t able to mimic well, so they apply the early stop method to eliminate the effect of distillation loss
on the total loss.
3
Method
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the insight behind the Channel Distillation, then we explain what
kind of intuition we are based on to improve Knowledge Distillation and design Guided Knowledge
Distillation, and ﬁnally describe our loss decay strategy, Early Decay Teacher.
3.1
Channel Distillation
Our method derives from the idea of SENet [10]. In SENet, Channel-Wise Attention enables the
model to learn the weight of each channel, and then multiplies the weight back to the original channel.
The features of those important channels are enhanced, and the insigniﬁcant are weakened, so that the
extracted features are more directional and the network predicts better. The weight of each channel is
given by:
wc =
1
H × W
H
X
i=1
W
X
h=1
uc(i, j)
(1)
where wc is the weight of cth channel. H, W are the spatial dimensions of the feature map and
uc(i, j) is the activation.
3


Figure 2: The architecture of our distillation network, where CD means Channel Distillation and
GKD means Guided Knowledge Distillation.
Each channel of the feature map corresponds to a visual pattern [38], but the importance of each
channel’s visual pattern is different. Since teacher’s performance is better than student, we think that
the visual pattern learned by teacher is more accurate, and we want student to learn the teacher’s visual
pattern. We use GAP to calculate the importance of each channel’s feature map, which represnets
attention information of each channel. Then we consider the attention information of each channel’s
feature map as knowledge. The student and the teacher will calculate the attention information of each
channel from their feature maps respectively, and then the teacher will supervise the student to learn
the attention information of each channel, and transfer the attention information to the student. In
this way, the student can learn the teacher’s attention information of each channel, thereby improving
its performance. Normally, the number of layers of the teacher and the student is inconsistent. For
simple processing, we only perform Channel Distillation between the networks where the spatial
resolution decreases. In addition, if the number of channels is mismatch, we follow the method of
FitNets [14] which uses 1 × 1 convolution to upgrade the dimension. The student’s feature map
is ﬁrst upgraded to the same number of channels as the teacher, and then Channel Distillation is
performed. The formulation of CD loss is deﬁned as:
CD(s, t) =
Pn
i=1
Pc
j=1 (wij
s −wij
t )
2
n × c
(2)
where CD(s, t) means the CD loss between the student and the teacher. wij is the weight of jth
channel of ith sample. c represents the number of channels.
Figure 2 is the structure of our distillation network. The upper blue part represents the teacher
network and the lower red part represents the student network. Among them, the four squares in the
front represent the feature map, the vertical bar in the back represents the predition after softmax, CD
represents the channel distillation above, and GKD represents the Guided Knowledge Distillation.
We will introduce GKD in the following section.
3.2
Guided Knowledge Distillation
Our Guided Knowledge Distillation (GKD) is devised on the basis of KD [13]. The basic idea of
KD is to calculate the prediction distribution between the teacher and the student. By gradually
minimizing the divergence between them, the output distribution of the student is similar to the
teacher’s. The formula of KD is given by:
p = softmax( a
T )
(3)
KD(s, t) =
Pn
i=1 KL(pi
s, pi
t)
n
(4)
4


where p is probability distribution computed by logit, a. And T is a temperature. Utilizing a higher
value for T produces softer probability distribution over classes. n is the batch size. In addition, the
KD(s, t) is the mean of Kullback-Leibler divergence (KL) between pi
s and pi
t.
Although the teacher network is more accurate than the student, the teacher still has some prediction
errors in a batch, so there will be a serious problem. When the teacher predicts incorrectly, the
knowledge will also be transferred to the student, which will deteriorate the performance of the
student. Therefore, we improved on the basis of KD to get GKD. Our intention is that the teacher
only transfer the positive predition distribution to the student and directly ignore the negative. More
speciﬁcally, our approach is to only backward the KD loss of those samples correctly predicted by
the teacher network and ignore incorrectly. As shown in Figure 2. The formula of GKD is deﬁned as
follows:
GKD(s, t) =
Pn
i=1 I(pi
t, yi)KL(pi
s, pi
t)
Pn
i=1 I(pi
t, yi)
(5)
where I is an indicator function and I(pi
t, yi) is 1 when the output of the teacher equals true label,
or else I(pi
t, yi) is 0. For example, supposing a batch size has n samples and the teacher correctly
predicts n1 samples, we only calculate the GKD loss of the n1 samples.
3.3
Early Decay teacher
[24] proposed that the impact of distillation is not always positive. In the early stage of network
training, KD helps student train, but it will inhibit student learning better in the later, so at the
appropriate time stopping the teacher’s supervision helps the student train. The experimental results
show that at a certain epoch, the loss of cross-entropy will reversely rise. At this point, it will be
better to stop the teacher’s supervision, but the practice of directly stopping the distillation is hard.
Therefore, we propose a relatively soft approach. Our distillation loss weight decreases as the learning
rate decreases. The formula is deﬁned as follows:
EDT(α) = α × λne/n
(6)
where α is initial weight of distllation loss, and λ is a constant coefﬁcient. ne denotes nth epoch in
the entire training process, and n is an empirical value representing the number of epochs we reduce
our weight of loss.
We only decrease the weight of CD loss. For the GKD loss, we don’t decrease its weight throughout
the training process, because the GKD loss only teaches the correct knowledge from the teacher to
the student.
In the end, the student network is then trained by optimizing the following loss function:
Loss(s, t) = EDT(α)CD(s, t) + GKD(s, t) + CE(s, y)
(7)
where CE is the cross entropy loss function commonly used in classiﬁcation and y denotes the true
label.
4
Experiments
We evaluated the efﬁciency of our distillation method on several datasets and networks. Since most
of other distillation methods reported the performance in this domain, we also compared our results
with other distillation methods. All experiments were conducted using PyTorch [37] framework.
4.1
Datasets
We validated our distillation method on CIFAR100 [34] and ImageNet [35] datasets. CIFAR100
contains 50,000 training images and 10,000 test images with 100 categories. ImageNet provides 1.2
million images from 1,000 classes for training and 50,000 images for validation.
5


Table 1: Top error on ImageNet validation set (%). All experiments follow the training settings in
Section 4.2.
Method
Model
Top-1 error(%)
Top-5 error(%)
teacher
ResNet34
26.73
8.74
student
ResNet18
30.43
10.76
KD
ResNet34-ResNet18
29.50
9.52
CD(our)
ResNet34-ResNet18
28.53
9.56
CD+GKD(our)
ResNet34-ResNet18
28.26
9.41
CD+GKD+EDT(our)
ResNet34-ResNet18
27.61
9.2
4.2
Implement Details
First, we reproduced the results of distillation using cross-entropy loss and KD loss. Subsequently,
we conducted an ablation study in Section 4.3 to validate the effectiveness of the CD loss, GKD loss,
and EDT methods proposed in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, respectively. Our teacher network and
student network use ResNet family network. During CIFAR100 and ImageNet training, the teacher
network is initialized with the pre-training weights on the training set.
For all experiments on ImageNet, we used stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer with momen-
tum 0.9 and weight decay 1e-4 for training. For the teacher network, we froze the parameters weight
of all teacher layers. The input size is set to 224 × 224. The initial learning rate is 0.1, divided by 10
at 30, 60 and 90 epochs. We set batch size to 256 and train for 100 epochs. We used a standard data
augmentation scheme with crop and ﬂip, and normalize the input images using the channel means
and standard deviations.
When training on CIFAR100, the values of the training parameters are different. Since the image size
of the CIFAR100 dataset is 32 × 32, in order to make the ResNet network learn better features on low
resolution images, we modiﬁed the ﬁrst convolution layer parameters of ResNet from kernel_size
= 7, stride = 2 and padding = 3 to kernel_size = 3, stride = 1 and padding = 1. Then we removed
the max pooling layer after the ﬁrst convolution layer. SGD optimizer are still used, but the weight
decay is set to 5e-4 and batch size is set to 128. The initial learning rate is still 0.1, divided by 5 at 60,
120 and 160 epochs. The entire model is trained with 200 epochs. For CIFAR100 dataset, we used
padding=4, ﬂip and crop to augment input data, and normalized the input images with the channel
means and standard deviations.
4.3
Ablation Study
In this part, we conducted three ablation studies to validate the effectiveness of the CD loss, GKD
loss, and EDT methods proposed in Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, respectively. On ImageNet dataset, we
mainly use ResNet34 as the teacher network and ResNet18 as the student network. In Table 1, we
report our experiment results on ImageNet.
Obviously, when only using CD loss distillation, the performance of the student network ResNet18
has exceeded the performance of the student network ResNet18 using KD loss distillation. This
shows that our proposed CD loss make the student network learn more knowledge from the teacher
network. Next, we add GKD loss on the basis of CD loss, speed up the student’s learning process of
positive knowledge, and get better performance. We continue to add the EDT strategy and gradually
reduce the supervision of CD loss in the later stages of training so that student learns a better local
optimum, which makes student even better.
On CIFAR100 dataset, we mainly use ResNet152 as the teacher network and ResNet50 as the student
network. Due to our improvement of ResNet network structure, our ResNet152 and ResNet50
baseline performance is much higher than the results reported in other papers. On this basis, we
use ResNet152 teacher to distill ResNet50 student. In Table 2, we report our experiment results on
CIFAR100. On CIFAR100, our proposed method makes the performance of ResNet50 student exceed
the ResNet152 teacher.
It is easy to ﬁnd that on a small-capacity dataset such as CIFAR100, our method is 1.73% higher than
the KD loss. For the CIFAR100 dataset, ResNet152 has a large network capacity, so that ResNet152
6


Table 2: Top error on CIFAR100 validation set (%). All experiments follow the training settings in
Section 4.2.
Method
Model
Top-1 error(%)
Top-5 error(%)
teacher
ResNet152
19.09
4.45
student
ResNet50
22.02
5.74
KD
ResNet152-ResNet50
20.36
4.94
CD(our)
ResNet152-ResNet50
20.08
4.78
CD+GKD(our)
ResNet152-ResNet50
19.49
4.85
CD+GKD+EDT(our)
ResNet152-ResNet50
18.63
4.29
Table 3: Top-1 and Top-5 error rates (%) of student network ResNet18 on ImageNet validation set.
We compare our method with KD [13] (Hinton et al., 2015), FitNets [14] (Adriana Romero et al.,
2015), AT [9] (Sergey Zagoruyko et al., 2016), RKD [6] (Mengya Gao et al., 2020), and CRD [36]
(Yonglong Tian et al., 2020).
Method
Model
GFLOPS(G)
Top-1 error(%)
Top-5 error(%)
teacher
ResNet34
3.672
26.73
8.74
student
ResNet18
1.820
30.43
10.76
KD
ResNet34-ResNet18
1.820
29.50
9.52
FitNets
ResNet34-ResNet18
1.820
29.34
10.77
AT
ResNet34-ResNet18
1.820
29.30
10.00
RKD
ResNet34-ResNet18
1.820
28.46
9.74
CD+GKD+EDT(our)
ResNet34-ResNet18
1.820
27.61
9.2
network contains many useless parameters. In order to avoid teaching invalid knowledge to the
student, our distillation method reduces the supervision of ResNet152 teacher in the later stages
of training, and uses GKD losses only to teach correct knowledge to the student, which makes our
ResNet50 student perform better than ResNet152 teacher.
4.4
Performance comparison of different knowledge distillation methods
In this part, we compared our method with other knowledge distillation methods (including KD,
FitNets, AT, RKD, CRD) on the ImageNet dataset. In Table 3, we report the performance of different
knowledge distillation methods on ImageNet.
It can be found from Table 3 that using KD loss to distill on ImageNet can’t achieve an excellent
result, and only improve the accuracy of the student network by 0.93% (top-1) and 1.24% (top-5).
The performance of FitNets and AT is slightly better than KD loss, but the accuracy of top-1 is only
improved by less than 0.2% (top-1) than KD loss, and the accuracy of top-5 is even lower than KD
loss. RKD improves the accuracy of student networks by 1.97% (top-1) and 1.02% (top-5), which is
much better than KD, FitNets, AT and CRD methods. Our method is improved by 0.78% (top-1) and
0.35% (top-5) than RKD, which shows that our method make the student network learn knowledge
from the teacher network more effectively.
5
Conclusion
We proposed Channel-Wise Attention for Knowledge Distillation: a novel form of knowledge
distillation that aims to transfer the channel attention information from the teacher to the student, not
just mimicking the teacher’s representation in label. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method compared with other knowledge distillation methods. We have also shown
that our CD+GKD+EDT method achieves the state-of-the-art on ImageNet and suprising result on
CIFAR100. The method we proposed can be used for model compression, which can signiﬁcantly
reduce the model calculation cost.
7


References
[1] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional
neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012.
[2] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[3] Ioffe, Sergey, and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[4] Zehao Huang and Naiyan Wang. Like what you like: Knowledge distill via neuron selectivity transfer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01219, 2017.
[5] Junho Yim, Donggyu Joo, Jihoon Bae, and Junmo Kim. A gift from knowledge distillation: Fast optimiza-
tion, network minimization and transfer learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
[6] Mengya Gao, Yujun Shen, Quanquan Li, and Chen Change Loy. Residual Knowledge Distillation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2002.09168, 2020.
[7] Byeongho Heo, Minsik Lee, Sangdoo Yun, and Jin Young Choi. Knowledge transfer via distillation of
activation boundaries formed by hidden neurons. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 2019.
[8] Frederick Tung and Greg Mori. Similarity-preserving knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
[9] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Paying more attention to attention. Improving the performance
of convolutional neural networks via attention transfer. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2017.
[10] Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. Squeeze-and-excitation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
[11] Long Chen, Hanwang Zhang, Jun Xiao, Liqiang Nie, Jian Shao, Wei Liu, and Tat-Seng Chua. SCA-CNN:
Spatial and channel-wise attention in convolutional networks for image captioning. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
[12] Jongchan Park, Sanghyun Woo, Joon-Young Lee, In So Kweon. BAM: Bottleneck Attention Module. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1807.06514, 2018.
[13] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling knowledge in a neural network. In Deep Learning
and Representation Learning Workshop, NIPS, 2014.
[14] Adriana Romero, Nicolas Ballas, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Antoine Chassang, Carlo Gatta, and Yoshua
Bengio. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2015.
[15] Sanghyun Woo, Jongchan Park, Joon-Young Lee, and In So Kweon. Convolutional block attention module.
In the European Conference on Computer Vision, 2018.
[16] Xiang Li, Wenhai Wang, Xiaolin Hu, and Jian Yang. Selective kernel networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
[17] Li Xiang, Xiaolin Hu, and Jian Yang. Spatial group-wise enhance: Improving semantic feature learning in
convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09646 ,2019.
[18] Fei Wang, Mengqing Jiang, Chen Qian, Shuo Yang, Cheng Li, Honggang Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, and
Xiaoou Tang. Residual attention network for image classiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
[19] Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional neural
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[20] Wonpyo Park, Dongju Kim, Yan Lu, and Minsu Cho. Relational Knowledge Distillation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
8


[21] Baoyun Peng, Xiao Jin, Jiaheng Liu, Dongsheng Li, Yichao Wu, Yu Liu, Shunfeng Zhou, and Zhaoning
Zhang. Correlation Congruence for Knowledge Distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
[22] David Duvenaud, Dougal Maclaurin, and Ryan P. Adams. Early stopping is nonparametric variational
inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.01344, 2015.
[23] Maren Mahsereci, Lukas Balles, Christoph Lassner, Philipp Hennig. Early stopping without a validation
set. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09580, 2017.
[24] Jang Hyun Cho and Bharath Hariharan. On the Efﬁcacy of Knowledge Distillation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019.
[25] Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to be deep? In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2014.
[26] Rich Caruana, Steve Lawrence, and Lee Giles. Overﬁtting in neural nets: Backpropagation, conjugate
gradient, and early stopping. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2001.
[27] Buciluˇa, Cristian, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. Model compression. In Proceedings of
the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2006.
[28] Olshausen, Bruno A., Charles H. Anderson, and David C. Van Essen. A neurobiological model of
visual attention and invariant pattern recognition based on dynamic routing of information. Journal of
Neuroscience, 1993, 13(11): 4700-4719.
[29] Laurent Itti, Christof Koch, and Ernst Niebur. A model of saliency-based visual attention for rapid scene
analysis. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 1998, 20(11): 1254-1259.
[30] Laurent Itti and Christof Koch. Computational modelling of visual attention. Nature reviews neuroscience,
2001, 2(3): 194-203.
[31] Hugo Larochelle and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning to combine foveal glimpses with a third-order Boltzmann
machine. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2010.
[32] Mnih, Volodymyr, Nicolas Heess, and Alex Graves. Recurrent models of visual attention. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014.
[33] Thomas G. Dietterich, Suzanna Becker, and Zoubin Ghahramani. Attention is all you need. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[34] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Handbook
of Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, 2009, 1(4).
[35] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical
image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2009.
[36] Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan and Phillip Isola. Contrastive Representation Distillation. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[37] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zeming
Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in pytorch. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[38] Marcel Simon and Erik Rodner. Neural activation constellations: Unsupervised part model discovery with
convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015.
9
