Recent Advances on Neural Network Pruning at Initialization
Huan Wang1 , Can Qin1 , Yue Bai1 , Yulun Zhang2 and Yun Fu1
1Northeastern University
2ETH Zürich
{wang.huan, qin.ca, bai.yue}@northeastern.edu, yulun100@gmail.com, yunfu@ece.neu.edu
Abstract
Neural network pruning typically removes con-
nections or neurons from a pretrained converged
model; while a new pruning paradigm, pruning at
initialization (PaI), attempts to prune a randomly
initialized network. This paper offers the ﬁrst sur-
vey concentrated on this emerging pruning fashion.
We ﬁrst introduce a generic formulation of neu-
ral network pruning, followed by the major clas-
sic pruning topics. Then, as the main body of this
paper, a thorough and structured literature review
of PaI methods is presented, consisting of two ma-
jor tracks (sparse training and sparse selection). Fi-
nally, we summarize the surge of PaI compared to
PaT and discuss the open problems. Apart from the
dedicated literature review, this paper also offers a
code base for easy sanity-checking and benchmark-
ing of different PaI methods.
1
Introduction
Network architecture design is a central topic when develop-
ing neural networks for various artiﬁcial intelligence tasks,
especially in deep learning [LeCun et al., 2015; Schmid-
huber, 2015].
The wisdom from learning theory suggests
that the best generalization comes from a good trade-off be-
tween sample size and model complexity [Kearns et al., 1994;
Vapnik, 2013], which implies to use neural networks of
proper sizes.
However, it is non-trivial to know in prac-
tice what size ﬁts properly.
Over-parameterized networks
are thus preferred due to their abundant expressivity when
tackling complex real-world problems. In deep learning era,
this rule-of-thumb is even more pronounced not only be-
cause we are handling more complex problems, but also
over-parameterized networks are observed easier to optimize
(with proper regularization) [Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015;
He et al., 2016] and possibly lead to better generaliza-
tion [Soltanolkotabi et al., 2018; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019;
Zou et al., 2020] than their compact counterparts.
However, over-parameterization brings cost in either test-
ing or training phase, such as excessive model footprint, slow
inference speed, extra model transportation and energy con-
sumption. As a remedy, neural network pruning is pro-
posed to remove unnecessary connections or neurons in a
Pruning paradigm
Weight src Mask src Train sparse net?
Pruning after training
Convg. net Convg. net
 (mostly)
Pruning at Initialization
Sparse training (LTH)
Init. net
Convg. net

Sparse training (SNIP)
Init. net
Init. net

Sparse selection (Hidden)
Init. net
Init. net

Table 1:
Comparison between pruning at initialization (PaI)
and pruning after training (PaT). As seen, weight source is the axis
that differentiates PaI methods from their traditional counterparts:
PaI methods inherit weights from a randomly initialized (Init.) net-
work instead of a converged (Convg.) network. PaI methods can be
further classiﬁed into two major categories: sparse training (picked
sparse network will be trained) and sparse selection (picked sparse
network will not be trained). In the parentheses is the representative
method of each genre: LTH [Frankle and Carbin, 2019], SNIP [Lee
et al., 2019], Hidden [Ramanujan et al., 2020].
neural network without seriously compromising the perfor-
mance. A typical pruning pipeline comprises 3 steps [Reed,
1993]: (1) pretraining a (redundant) dense model ⇒(2)
pruning the dense model to a sparse one ⇒(3) ﬁnetun-
ing the sparse model to regain performance. Namely, prun-
ing is considered as a post-processing solution to ﬁx the
side-effect brought by pretraining the dense model.
This
post-processing paradigm of pruning has been practiced for
more than 30 years and well covered by many surveys, e.g.,
a relatively outdated survey [Reed, 1993], recent surveys
of pruning alone [Gale et al., 2019; Blalock et al., 2020;
Hoeﬂer et al., 2021] or as a sub-topic under the umbrella
of model compression and acceleration [Sze et al., 2017;
Cheng et al., 2018a; Cheng et al., 2018b; Deng et al., 2020].
However, a newly surging pruning paradigm, pruning at
initialization (PaI), is absent from these surveys (we are
aware that PaI is discussed in one very recent survey [Hoe-
ﬂer et al., 2021], yet merely with one subsection; our pa-
per aims to offer a more thorough and concentrated cover-
age). Unlike pruning after training (PaT) (see Tab. 1), PaI
prunes a randomly initialized dense network instead of a pre-
trained one. PaI aims to train (or purely select) a sparse net-
work out of a randomly initialized dense network to achieve
(close to) full accuracy (the accuracy reached by the dense
network). This had been believed unpromising as plenty of
prior works have observed training the sparse network from
scratch underperforms PaT, until recently, lottery ticket hy-
pothesis (LTH) [Frankle and Carbin, 2019] and SNIP [Lee
arXiv:2103.06460v3  [cs.LG]  23 May 2022


et al., 2019] successfully ﬁnd sparse networks which can be
trained from scratch to full accuracy. They open new doors to
efﬁcient sparse network training with possibly less cost.
This paper aims to present a comprehensive coverage of
this emerging pruning paradigm, discussing its historical ori-
gin, the status quo, and possible future directions. The rest of
this paper is organized as follows. First, Sec. 2 introduces the
background of network pruning, consisting of a generic for-
mulation of pruning and the classic topics in PaT. Next, Sec. 3
presents the thorough coverage of PaI methods. Then, Sec. 4
summarizes the PaI fashion and discusses the open problems.
Finally, Sec. 5 concludes this paper.
2
Background of Neural Network Pruning
2.1
A Generic Formulation of Pruning
The stochastic gradient descent (SGD) learner of a neural net-
work parameterized by w produces a model sequence which
ﬁnally converges to a model with desired performance:

w(0), w(1), · · · , w(k), · · · , w(K)	
,
(1)
where K denotes the total number of training iterations. In
PaT, we only need the last model checkpoint (k = K) as the
base model for pruning. However, the new pruning paradigm
asks for models at different iterations, e.g., LTH needs the
model at iteration 0 [Frankle and Carbin, 2019] (or an early
iteration [Frankle et al., 2020a], we consider this also as 0
for simplicity). To accommodate these new cases, we allow
a pruning algorithm to have access to the whole model se-
quence (which we can easily cache during the model train-
ing). Then, pruning can be deﬁned as a function, which takes
the model sequence as input (along with the training dataset
D), and outputs a pruned model w∗.
We need two pieces of information to make a neural net-
work exact, its topology and the associated parameter val-
ues. (1) In the case of a sparse network, the sparse topology
is typically deﬁned by a mask tensor (denoted by m, with
the same shape as w), which can be obtained via a func-
tion, m = f1(w(k1); D), that is, f1 can utilize the data avail-
able to help decide the masks (e.g., in regularization-based
pruning methods, such as [Wang et al., 2021]). (2) Mean-
while, the weights in the pruned model can be adjusted from
their original values to mitigate the incurred damage [Has-
sibi and Stork, 1993; Wang et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2019c;
Wang et al., 2021]. This step can be modeled as another func-
tion f2(w(k2); D). Together, pruning can be formulated as
w′ = f1(w(k1); D) ⊙f2(w(k2); D),
w∗= f3(w′; D),
(2)
where ⊙represents the Hadamard (element-wise) product; f3
models the ﬁnetuning process (which is omitted in the sparse
selection PaI methods). Note that, the input models for f1(∗)
and f2(∗) can be from different iterations. By this deﬁnition,
the pruning paradigms in Tab. 1 can be speciﬁed as follows,
• Pruning after training (PaT): k1 = K, k2 = K;
• Sparse training: k1 = K (LTH) or 0 (SNIP), k2 = 0,
and f2 = I (identity function), f3̸ = I;
• Sparse selection: k1 = k2 = 0, and f2 = f3 = I.
2.2
Classic Topics in Pruning
There are mainly four critical questions we need to ask when
pruning a speciﬁc model: what to prune, how many (connec-
tions or neurons) to prune, which to prune exactly, and how
to schedule the pruning process, corresponding to four clas-
sic topics in pruning as follows. We only brieﬂy explain them
here as they are not our main focus. For a more comprehen-
sive coverage, we refer the readers to [Hoeﬂer et al., 2021].
(1) Sparsity structure. Weights can be pruned in patterns.
The shape of the pattern, named sparsity structure, decides
the basic pruning element of a pruning algorithm. The small-
est structure, of course, is a single weight element, i.e., no
structure at all. This kind of pruning is called unstructured
pruning. The pruning pattern larger than a single weight el-
ement can be called structured pruning in general. Although
there are different levels of granularity when deﬁning struc-
tured pruning (see [Mao et al., 2017]), structured pruning typ-
ically means ﬁlter or channel pruning in the literature.
Practically, unstructured pruning is mainly favored for
model size compression, structured pruning more favored for
acceleration due to the hardware-friendly sparsity structure.
Acceleration is more imperative than compression for mod-
ern deep networks, so most PaT works focus on structured
pruning currently.
We will see that, differently, most PaI
methods focus on unstructured pruning instead.
(2) Pruning ratio. Pruning ratios indicate how many weights
to remove.
In general, there are two ways to determine
pruning ratios. (i) The ﬁrst is to pre-deﬁne them. Namely,
we know exactly how many parameters will be pruned be-
fore the algorithm actually runs. This scheme can be fur-
ther speciﬁed into two sub-schemes. One is to set a global
pruning ratio (i.e., how many weights will be pruned for the
whole network); the other is to set layer-wise pruning ra-
tios. (ii) The second is to decide the pruning ratio by other
means. This way mostly appears in the regularization-based
pruning methods, which remove weights by driving them to-
wards zero via penalty terms. A larger regularization fac-
tor typically leads to more sparsity, i.e., a larger pruning ra-
tio. However, how to set a proper factor to achieve the de-
sired sparsity usually demands heavy tuning. Several meth-
ods have been proposed to improve this [Wang et al., 2019c;
Wang et al., 2021] – the pruning ratios are usually pre-
speciﬁed. Recent years also have seen some works that auto-
matically search the optimal layer-wise pruning ratio [He et
al., 2018]. No consensus has been reached on which is better.
(3) Pruning criterion.
Pruning criterion decides which
weights to remove given a sparsity budget. It is considered
one of the most critical problems in network pruning, thus has
received the most research attention so far. The most simple
criterion is weight magnitude (or equivalently, L1-norm for
a tensor) [Han et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017]. Because of its
simplicity, it is the most prevailing criterion in PaT now. We
will see it also being widely used in PaI.
Albeit much exploration in this topic, there are no criteria
that prove to be signiﬁcantly better than the others (actually,
the simple magnitude pruning has been argued as (one of)
the SOTA [Gale et al., 2019]). Since this topic is already
well discussed in prior surveys in PaT, we will not cover it in


PaI
Sparse Training
Sparse Selection (Strong LTH): Deconstrust’19, Hidden’20, Proving’20, Logrithmic’20
Static Masks
Dynamic Masks: DeepR’18, SET’18, DSR’19, SNFS’19,
RigL’20
Post-selected Masks
(LTH’19)
Pre-selected Masks: SNIP’19, GraSP’20, AI’20, SynFlow’20, SupSup’20, DLTH’22
Extensions
Sanity-checks: RandomTickets’20, MissMark’21, Correlation’21,
ReallyWin?’21
- Technical: OneTicket’19, LTH+’20, EB’20,
RL&NLP’20, BERT’20, Lifelong’20, Pretraining’21,
GNN’21, PrAC’21, E-LTH’21, Multi-Prize’21
- Theoretical: EarlyPhase’20, GradFlow’20, Manifold’21
Figure 1: Overview of pruning at initialization (PaI) approaches, classiﬁed into two general groups: sparse training and sparse selection.
For readability, references are omitted in this ﬁgure but the paper abbreviations (right beside the abbreviation is the year when the paper
appeared). Please see Sec. 3 for detailed introductions of them. Due to limited length, this paper only outlines the primary methods, see full
collection at https://github.com/mingsun-tse/awesome-pruning-at-initialization.
depth here. One point worth mention is that, the core idea un-
derpinning most pruning criteria now is to select the weights
whose absence induces the least loss change. This idea and
its variant have been followed for a long time in PaT [LeCun
et al., 1990; Hassibi and Stork, 1993; Wang et al., 2019a;
Molchanov et al., 2017; Molchanov et al., 2019], which con-
tinues to PaI, as we will see.
(4) Pruning schedule. After the three aspects determined
above, we ﬁnally need to specify the schedule of pruning.
There are three typical choices [Wang et al., 2019b]. (i) One-
shot: network sparsity (deﬁned by the ratio of zeroed weights
in a network) goes from 0 to a target number in a single step,
then ﬁnetune. (ii) Progressive: network sparsity goes from
0 to a target number gradually, typically along with network
training; then ﬁnetune. (iii) Iterative: network sparsity goes
from 0 to an intermediate target number, then ﬁnetune; then
repeat the process until the target sparsity is achieved. Note,
both (ii) and (iii) are characterized by pruning interleaved
with network training. Therefore, there is no fundamental
boundary between the two. Some works thus use the two
terms interchangeably. One consensus is that, progressive and
iterative pruning outperform the one-shot counterpart when
pruning the same number of weights because they allow more
time for the network to adapt. In PaI, LTH employs itera-
tive pruning, which increases the training cost signiﬁcantly.
PaI works featured by pre-selected masks (e.g., [Wang et al.,
2020]) are thereby motivated to resolve this problem.
3
Pruning at Initialization (PaI)
3.1
Overview: History Sketch
Debut: LTH and SNIP. The major motivation of PaI vs. PaT
is to achieve cheaper and simpler pruning – pruning a net-
work at initialization prior to training “eliminates the need
for both pretraining and the complex pruning schedule” (as
quoted from SNIP [Lee et al., 2019]). Specially, two works
lead this surge, LTH [Frankle and Carbin, 2019] and SNIP.
Importantly, both make a similar claim: Non-trivially sparse
networks can be trained to full accuracy in isolation, which
was believed barely feasible before. Differently, LTH selects
masks from a pretrained model while SNIP selects masks
from the initialized model, i.e., post-selected vs. pre-selected
masks, as shown in Fig. 1.
Follow-ups of LTH and SNIP. (1) There are two major lines
of LTH follow-ups.
Acknowledging the efﬁcacy of LTH,
one line is to expand its universe, e.g., scaling LTH to larger
datasets and models (e.g., ResNet50 on ImageNet), validating
it on non-vision domains (e.g., natural language processing),
and proposing theoretical foundations. The other line takes a
decent grain of salt about the efﬁcacy of LTH, keeps sanity-
checking. (2) At the same time, for the direction led by SNIP,
more methods come out focusing on better pruning criteria.
Dynamic masks.
The masks in both LTH and SNIP are
static, namely, they are ﬁxed during training.
Some re-
searchers (such as [Evci et al., 2020a]) conjecture that dy-
namic and adaptive masks during training may be better,
thus introduce another group of methods featured by dynamic
masks. Together, the static-and dynamic-mask methods com-
plete the realm of sparse training.
Sparse selection. When some researchers attempt to under-
stand LTH through empirical studies, they discover an inter-
esting phenomenon. [Zhou et al., 2019] surprisingly ﬁnd that
the random network selected by winning ticket in LTH actu-
ally has non-trivial accuracy without any training. This dis-
covery brings us strong LTH: Sparse subnet picked from a
dense network can achieve full accuracy even without further
training, and opens a new direction named sparse selection.
The current PaI universe is primarily made up of the
above two categories, sparse training and sparse selection. A
method tree overview of PaI is presented in Fig. 1. Next, we
elaborate the major approaches in each genre in length.
3.2
Sparse Training
Static masks: post-selected. Sparse training methods of this
group are pioneered by LTH [Frankle and Carbin, 2019]. The
pruning pipeline in LTH has three steps: First, a randomly
initialized network is trained to convergence; Second, em-
ploy magnitude pruning to obtain the masks, which deﬁnes
the topology of the subnet; Third, apply the masks to the ini-
tial network to obtain a subnet and train the subnet to conver-
gence. This process can be repeated iteratively (i.e., iterative
magnitude pruning, or IMP). The authors surprisingly ﬁnd the
subnet can achieve comparable (or even better occasionally)
accuracy to the dense network. The lottery ticket hypothesis
is thus proposed: “dense, randomly-initialized, feed-forward
networks contain subnetworks (winning tickets) that—when


trained in isolation— reach test accuracy comparable to the
original network in a similar number of iterations.”
Follow-up works of LTH mainly fall into two groups. One
group identiﬁes the legitimacy of LTH and attempts to seek
a broader application or understanding of it. The other group
proposes several sanity-check ablations of LTH, taking a de-
cent grain of salt with its validity. These two groups are thus
summarized as extensions and sanity-checks in Fig. 1.
(1) Extensions. The original LTH is only validated on small
datasets (MNIST and CIFAR-10).
[Frankle et al., 2020a]
(LTH+) later generalize LTH to ResNet50 on ImageNet by
applying the masks not to the initial weights but to the
weights after a few epochs of training. [Morcos et al., 2019]
(OneTicket) discover that winning tickets can generalize
across a variety of datasets and optimizers within the natu-
ral images domain. Besides, winning tickets generated with
larger datasets consistently transfer better than those gener-
ated with smaller datasets, suggesting that winning tickets
contain inductive biases generic to neural networks. [Yu et
al., 2020] (RL&NLP) ﬁnd the lottery ticket phenomenon also
presents on RL and NLP tasks and use it to train compressed
Transformers to high performance. [Chen et al., 2020a] val-
idates lottery ticket phenomenon on BERT subnetworks at
40% to 90% sparsity. [Chen et al., 2020b] (Lifelong) in-
troduce two pruning methods, bottom-up and top-down, to
ﬁnd winning tickets in the lifelong learning scenario. [Chen
et al., 2021a] (Pretraining) locate matching subnetworks
at 59.04% to 96.48% sparsity that transfer universally to
multiple downstream tasks with no performance degrada-
tion for supervised and self-supervised pre-training. [Chen
et al., 2021b] (GNN) present a uniﬁed graph neural network
(GNN) sparsiﬁcation framework that simultaneously prunes
the graph adjacency matrix and the model weights and gen-
eralizes LTH to GNN for the ﬁrst time. The iterative train-
prune-retrain cycles on full training set in LTH can be very
expensive. To resolve this, [Zhang et al., 2021b] introduce
Pruning Aware Critical (PrAC) set, which is a subset of train-
ing data. PrAC set takes only 35.32% to 78.19% of the full
set (CIFAR10, CIFAR100, Tiny ImageNet) with similar ef-
fect, saving up to 60% to 90% training iterations. Moreover,
they ﬁnd the PrAC set can generalize across different network
architectures. Similarly, E-LTH [Chen et al., 2021c] also at-
tempt to ﬁnd winning tickets generic to different networks
without the expensive IMP process. They achieve so by trans-
forming winning tickets found in one network to another
deeper or shallower one from the same family. [You et al.,
2020] ﬁnd that winning tickets can be identiﬁed at the very
early training stage (thus they term the tickets early-bird, or
EB, tickets) via low-cost training schemes (e.g., early stopping
and low-precision training) at large learning rates, achieving
up to 4.7× energy saving while maintaining the performance.
[Diffenderfer and Kailkhura, 2021] (Multi-Prize) ﬁnd win-
ning tickets on binary neural networks for the ﬁrst time.
Beside the technical extensions of LTH above, researchers
also try to understand LTH more theoretically. [Frankle et al.,
2020b] (EarlyPhase) analyze the early phase of deep net-
work training. [Evci et al., 2020b] (GradFlow) present a gra-
dient ﬂow perspective to explain why LTH happens. [Zhang
et al., 2021a] (Manifold) verify the validity of LTH by lever-
aging dynamical systems theory and inertial manifold theory.
More works on the LTH theories study a stronger version of
LTH, i.e., sparse selection. We thus defer them to Sec. 3.3.
In short, extensions of LTH mainly focus on LTH+X (i.e.,
generalizing LTH to other tasks or learning settings, etc.),
identifying cheaper tickets, understanding LTH better.
(2) Sanity-checks. The validation of LTH seriously hinges on
experimental setting, which actually has been controversial
since the very beginning of LTH. In the same venue where
LTH is published, another pruning paper [Liu et al., 2019]
actually draws a pretty different conclusion from LTH. They
argue that a subnetwork with random initialization (vs. the
winning tickets picked by IMP in LTH) can be trained from
scratch to match pruning a pretrained model. Besides, [Gale
et al., 2019] also report that they cannot reproduce LTH. The
reasons, noted by [Liu et al., 2019], may reside in the ex-
perimental settings – [Liu et al., 2019] focus on ﬁlter prun-
ing and use momentum SGD with a large initial learning
rate (LR) (0.1), while [Frankle and Carbin, 2019] tackle un-
structured pruning and “mostly uses Adam [Kingma and Ba,
2015] with much lower learning rates”. This debate contin-
ues on. [Su et al., 2020] (RandomTickets) notice that ran-
domly changing the preserved weights in each layer (the re-
sulted initializations are thus named random tickets), while
keeping the layer-wise pruning ratio, does not affect the ﬁ-
nal performance, thus introduce the random tickets. [Fran-
kle et al., 2021] (MissMark) later report similar observation.
This property “suggests broader challenges with the under-
lying pruning heuristics, the desire to prune at initialization,
or both” [Frankle et al., 2021]. Meanwhile, [Liu et al., 2021]
(Correlation) ﬁnd that there is a strong correlation between
initialized weights and the ﬁnal weights in LTH, when the LR
is not sufﬁciently large, thereby they argue that “the existence
of winning property is correlated with an insufﬁcient DNN
pretraining, and is unlikely to occur for a well-trained DNN”.
This resonates with the conjecture by [Liu et al., 2019] above
that learning rate is a critical factor making their results seem-
ingly contradicted with LTH. [Ma et al., 2021] (ReallyWin?)
follow up this direction and present more concrete evidence
to clarify whether the winning ticket exists across the major
DNN architectures and/or applications.
Static masks: Pre-selected. SNIP [Lee et al., 2019] pioneers
the direction featured by pre-selected masks. SNIP proposes
a pruning criterion named connectivity sensitivity to select
weights based on a straightforward idea of loss preservation,
i.e., removing the weights whose absence leads to the least
loss change. After initialization, each weight can be assigned
a score with the above pruning criterion, then remove the last-
p fraction (p is the desired pruning ratio) parameters for sub-
sequent training. Later, [Wang et al., 2020] argue that it is the
training dynamics rather than the loss value itself that matters
more at the beginning of training. Therefore they propose
gradient signal preservation (GraSP) in contrast to the pre-
vious loss preservation, based on Hessian. Concurrently to
GraSP [Wang et al., 2020], [Lee et al., 2020] seek to explain
the feasibility of SNIP through the lens of signal propagation.
They empirically ﬁnd pruning damages the dynamical isom-
etry [Saxe et al., 2014] of neural networks and propose an


Method
Pruning criterion
Skeletonization (1989)
−∇wL ⊙w
OBD (1990)
diag(H)w ⊙w
Taylor-FO (2019)
(∇wL ⊙w)2
SNIP (2019)
|∇wL ⊙w|
GraSP (2020)
−H∇wL ⊙w
SynFlow (2020)
∂R
∂w ⊙w, R = 1⊤(ΠL
l=1|w[l]|)1
Table 2: Summary of pruning criteria in static-mask sparse training
methods. Above the dash line are PaT methods. L denotes the loss
function; H represents Hessian; 1 is the all ones vector; l denotes
the l-th layer of all L layers. Skeletonization [Mozer and Smolensky,
1989]. Taylor-FO [Molchanov et al., 2019].
data-independent initialization, approximated isometry (AI),
which is an extension of exact isometry to sparse networks.
Later, SynFlow [Tanaka et al., 2020] proposes a new data-
independent criterion, which a variant of magnitude prun-
ing, yet taking into account the interaction of different lay-
ers. Meanwhile, SupSup [Wortsman et al., 2020] proposes
a training method to select different masks (supermasks) for
thousands of tasks in continual learning, from a single ﬁxed
random base network. Another very recent static-mask work
is DLTH (dual LTH) [Bai et al., 2022]. In LTH, initial weights
are given, the problem is to ﬁnd the matching masks, while in
DLTH, the masks are given, the problem is to ﬁnd the match-
ing initial weights. Speciﬁcally, they employ a growing L2
regularization [Wang et al., 2021] technique to transform the
original random weights to the desired condition.
To summarize, similar to PaT, the primary research atten-
tion in this line of PaI works also lies in pruning criterion.
Actually, many PaI works propose pretty similar criterion for-
mulas to those in PaT (see Tab. 2).
Dynamic masks. Another sparse training track allows the
masks to be changed during training.
DeepR [Bellec et
al., 2018] employs dynamic sparse parameterization with
stochastic parameter updates for training. SET [Mocanu et
al., 2018] adopts magnitude pruning and random growth
for dynamic network topology optimization. DSR [Mostafa
and Wang, 2019] adaptively allocates layer-wise sparsity ra-
tio with no need of manual setting and shows training-time
structural exploration is necessary for best generalization.
SNFS [Dettmers and Zettlemoyer, 2019] proposes to employ
the momentum of gradients to bring back pruned weights.
RigL [Evci et al., 2020a] also uses magnitudes for pruning,
yet they employ the absolute gradients for weight growing.
The essential idea of dynamic masks is to enable zeroed
weights to rejoin the training again.
Of note, this idea is
not newly brought up in PaI. It has been explored too in
pruning after training. In terms of the criteria, notably, be-
cause the masks need to re-evaluated frequently during train-
ing in dynamic-mask methods, the pruning and growing cri-
teria cannot be costly. Therefore, all these criteria are based
on magnitudes or gradients (see Tab. 3), which are readily
available during SGD training.
3.3
Sparse Selection
Sparse training methods still need to optimize the values of
the subnet after picking it out of the dense model. Some other
works have found another optimization scheme: instead of
Method
Pruning criterion
Growing criterion
DNS (2016)
|w|
|w| (pruned weights also updated)
DeepR (2018)
stochastic
random
SET (2018)
|w|
random
DSR (2019)
|w|
random
SNFS (2020)
|w|
momentum of ∇wL
RigL (2020)
|w|
|∇wL|
Table 3: Summary of pruning and growing criteria in dynamic-mask
sparse training methods. Above the dash line are the PaT methods.
DNS [Guo et al., 2016]; see other references in Sec. 3.3.
optimizing the weight values, optimize the network topology.
Namely, when a network is randomly initialized, all the val-
ues of each connection are ﬁxed. The goal is to ﬁnd a subnet
from the dense network without further training the subnet.
This line of works is ﬁrstly pioneered by [Zhou et al., 2019]
(Deconstruct) where they try to understand the mysteries
of LTH. They ﬁnd the subnet picked by LTH can achieve
non-trivial accuracies already (without training). This im-
plies that, although the original full network is randomly ini-
tialized, the chosen subnet is not really random. The subnet
picking process itself serves as a kind of training. There-
fore, [Zhou et al., 2019] propose the notion of supermasks
(or masking as training) along with a proposed algorithm to
optimize the masks in order to ﬁnd better supermasks.
The method in [Zhou et al., 2019] is only evaluated on
small-scale datasets (MNIST and CIFAR). Later, [Ramanu-
jan et al., 2020] (Hidden) introduce a trainable score for each
weight and update the score to minimize the loss function.
The trainable scores are eventually used to decide the selected
subnetwork topology. The method achieves strong perfor-
mance for the ﬁrst time. E.g., they manage to pick a sub-
net out of a random Wide ResNet50. The subnet is smaller
than ResNet34 while delivers better top-1 accuracy than the
trained ResNet34 on ImageNet. This discovery is summa-
rized as a stronger version of LTH, strong LTH: “within a
sufﬁciently over-parameterized neural network with random
weights (e.g. at initialization), there exists a subnet- work that
achieves competitive accuracy” [Ramanujan et al., 2020].
The above are the breakthroughs in terms of technical al-
gorithms. In terms of theoretical progress, [Malach et al.,
2020] (Proving) propose the theoretical basis of the strong
LTH, suggesting that “pruning a randomly initialized net-
work is as strong as optimizing the value of the weights”.
Less favorably, they make assumptions about the norms of
the inputs and of the weights. Later, [Orseau et al., 2020;
Pensia et al., 2020] (Logarithmic) remove the aforemen-
tioned limiting assumptions while providing signiﬁcantly
tighter bounds: “the over-parameterized network only needs
a logarithmic factor (in all variables but depth) number of
neurons per weight of the target subnetwork”. [Diffenderfer
and Kailkhura, 2021] have shown that scaled binary networks
can be pruned to approximate any target function, where the
optimization is polynomial in the width, depth, and approx-
imation error, akin to [Malach et al., 2020]. [Sreenivasan
et al., 2022] further demonstrate that a logarithmically over-
parameterized binary network is enough to approximate any
target function, similar to the advance of [Orseau et al., 2020;
Pensia et al., 2020] over [Malach et al., 2020].


4
Summary and Open Problems
4.1
Summary of Pruning at Initialization
Easily seen, the biggest paradigm shift from PaT to PaI is to
use a randomly initialized model to inherit weights for the
sparse network, just as the PaI term (pruning at initialization)
suggested. The primary goal is to achieve efﬁcient training,
in contrast to efﬁcient inference aimed by PaT. This section
answers what are the similarities and major differences be-
tween PaI vs. the traditional fashion in a big-picture level.
Sparse training: Much overlap between PaI and PaT. Not
surprisingly, there is considerable overlap between PaI and
PaT. (1) For LTH-like works, the adopted pruning scheme
is mainly (iterative) magnitude pruning, which has been de-
veloped for more than thirty years and widely considered as
the most simple pruning method. (2) For pre-selected-mask
methods, the proposed pruning criteria for PaI are reminis-
cent of those proposed in PaT (Tab. 2). Therefore, we may
continue seeing the wisdom in PaT being transferred to PaI.
In terms of the four primary aspects in pruning (Sec. 2.2),
PaI does not bring much change to the pruning ratio, crite-
rion, and schedule. However, for sparsity structure, it does
have a signiﬁcant impact. First, structured pruning (or ﬁlter
pruning) itself is not much interesting in the context of PaI be-
cause given the layer-wise sparsity ratios ﬁlter pruning at ini-
tialization reduces to training from scratch a dense network
(with a smaller width). Then the major technical problem is
how to initialize a slimmer network properly, which has been
well-explored. This is probably why most PaI works focus on
unstructured pruning rather than structured pruning. Second,
the well-known LTH is proposed for unstructured pruning.
As far as we know, to date, no work has validated the hypoth-
esis with ﬁlter pruning. The reason behind is still elusive.
Sparse selection: Signiﬁcant advance of PaI vs. PaT. The
common belief behind PaT is that the remaining parameters
possess knowledge learned by the original redundant model.
Inheriting the knowledge is better than starting over, which
has been also empirically justiﬁed by many works and thus
become a common practice for more than thirty years. In
stark contrast, PaI inherits the parameter values right from
the beginning. It is tempting to ask: At such an early phase of
neural network training, do the weights really possess enough
knowledge (to provide base models for subsequent pruning)?
Or more fundamentally, is neural network training essentially
to learn the knowledge from nothing or to reveal the knowl-
edge the model already has? PaT implies the former, while
PaI (especially sparse selection [Ramanujan et al., 2020;
Malach et al., 2020]) suggests the latter. This, we believe, is
(arguably) the most profound advance PaI has brought about.
The understanding of this question will not only bestow us
practical beneﬁts, but also, more importantly, a deeper theo-
retical understanding of deep neural networks.
4.2
Open Problems
Same problems as pruning after training. Given the over-
lap between PaI and PaT, nearly all the open problems in PaT
will also apply to PaI, too, centering on the four classic topics
in pruning: how to ﬁnd better sparsity structure being hard-
ware friendly and meanwhile optimization friendly, how to
ﬁnd better pruning criteria, how to allocate the sparsity more
properly cross different layers, and how to schedule the spar-
siﬁcation process more wisely, in the hopes of higher perfor-
mance given the same sparsity budget. We do not reiterate
these topics here considering they have been well treated in
existing pruning surveys (e.g., [Hoeﬂer et al., 2021]).
Under-performance of PaI. The idea of PaI is intriguing,
however, in terms of practical performance, PaI methods still
underperform PaT methods by an obvious margin.
E.g.,
according to the experiments in [Wang et al., 2020], with
VGG19 and ResNet32 networks on CIFAR-10/100, both
SNIP and GraSP are consistently outperformed across dif-
ferent sparsity levels by two traditional pruning methods
(OBD [LeCun et al., 1990] and MLPrune [Zeng and Urta-
sun, 2019]), which are not even close to the state-of-the-art.
[Frankle et al., 2021] also report similar observation. In this
sense, there is still a long road ahead before we can really
“save resources at training time” [Wang et al., 2020].
Under-development of sparse libraries.
Despite the
promising potential of sparse training, the practical accel-
eration beneﬁt to date has not been satisfactory.
E.g.,
SNFS [Dettmers and Zettlemoyer, 2019] claims “up to 5.61x
faster training”, yet in practice, due to under-development of
sparse matrix multiplication libraries, this beneﬁt cannot be
materialized at present. To our best knowledge, few works
have reported wall-time speedup in sparse training. Develop-
ment of sparse training libraries thus can be a worthy future
cause. In this regard, notably, dynamic-mask methods pose
even more severe issues than static-mask methods as the con-
stantly changing masks will make it harder for the hardware
to gain acceleration. If the training is not really getting faster,
this may fundamentally undermine the motivation of sparse
training, which actually is the main force of PaI now.
To sum, the major challenges facing PaI is to deliver the
practical training speedup with no (serious) performance
compromised, as it promises. This hinges on a more profound
comprehension of the performance gap between sparse train-
ing and PaT, as well as the advance of sparse matrix libraries.
Code base. As discussed, PaI works (especially LTH-like)
severely hinge on empirical studies. However, it is non-trivial
in deep learning to tune hyper-parameters. In this paper, we
thereby also offer a code base1 with systematic support of
popular networks, datasets, and logging tools, in the hopes of
aiding researchers and practitioner focus more on the insights
and core methods instead of the tedious engineering details.
5
Conclusion
This paper presents the ﬁrst survey concentrated on neu-
ral network pruning at initialization (PaI). The road map of
PaI vs. its pruning-after-training counterpart is studied with a
thorough and structured literature review. We close by out-
lining the open problems and offer a code base towards easy
sanity-checking and benchmarking of different PaI methods.
Acknowledgments.
We thank Jonathan Frankle, Alex
Renda, and Michael Carbin from MIT for their very helpful
suggestions to our work.
1https://github.com/mingsun-tse/smile-pruning


References
[Allen-Zhu et al., 2019] Zeyuan
Allen-Zhu,
Yuanzhi
Li,
and
Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparameterized
neural networks, going beyond two layers. In NeurIPS, 2019.
[Bai et al., 2022] Yue Bai, Huan Wang, Zhiqiang Tao, Kunpeng Li,
and Yun Fu. Dual lottery ticket hypothesis. In ICLR, 2022.
[Bellec et al., 2018] Guillaume Bellec, David Kappel, Wolfgang
Maass, and Robert Legenstein.
Deep rewiring: Training very
sparse deep networks. In ICLR, 2018.
[Blalock et al., 2020] Davis
Blalock,
Jose
Javier
Gonzalez,
Jonathan Frankle, and John V Guttag. What is the state of neural
network pruning? In SysML, 2020.
[Chen et al., 2020a] Tianlong Chen,
Jonathan Frankle,
Shiyu
Chang, Sijia Liu, Yang Zhang, Zhangyang Wang, and Michael
Carbin.
The lottery ticket hypothesis for pre-trained bert net-
works. In NeurIPS, 2020.
[Chen et al., 2020b] Tianlong Chen, Zhenyu Zhang, Sijia Liu,
Shiyu Chang, and Zhangyang Wang. Long live the lottery: The
existence of winning tickets in lifelong learning. In ICLR, 2020.
[Chen et al., 2021a] Tianlong Chen,
Jonathan Frankle,
Shiyu
Chang, Sijia Liu, Yang Zhang, Michael Carbin, and Zhangyang
Wang.
The lottery tickets hypothesis for supervised and self-
supervised pre-training in computer vision models.
In CVPR,
2021.
[Chen et al., 2021b] Tianlong Chen, Yongduo Sui, Xuxi Chen, As-
ton Zhang, and Zhangyang Wang. A uniﬁed lottery ticket hy-
pothesis for graph neural networks. In ICML, 2021.
[Chen et al., 2021c] Xiaohan Chen, Yu Cheng, Shuohang Wang,
Zhe Gan, Jingjing Liu, and Zhangyang Wang. The elastic lot-
tery ticket hypothesis. In NeurIPS, 2021.
[Cheng et al., 2018a] Jian Cheng, Pei-song Wang, Gang Li, Qing-
hao Hu, and Han-qing Lu. Recent advances in efﬁcient computa-
tion of deep convolutional neural networks. Frontiers of Informa-
tion Technology & Electronic Engineering, 19(1):64–77, 2018.
[Cheng et al., 2018b] Yu Cheng, Duo Wang, Pan Zhou, and Tao
Zhang. Model compression and acceleration for deep neural net-
works: The principles, progress, and challenges. IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 35(1):126–136, 2018.
[Deng et al., 2020] Lei Deng, Guoqi Li, Song Han, Luping Shi, and
Yuan Xie.
Model compression and hardware acceleration for
neural networks: A comprehensive survey. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 108(4):485–532, 2020.
[Dettmers and Zettlemoyer, 2019] Tim Dettmers and Luke Zettle-
moyer. Sparse networks from scratch: Faster training without
losing performance. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04840, 2019.
[Diffenderfer and Kailkhura, 2021] James
Diffenderfer
and
Bhavya Kailkhura. Multi-prize lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding
accurate binary neural networks by pruning a randomly weighted
network. In ICLR, 2021.
[Evci et al., 2020a] Utku
Evci,
Trevor
Gale,
Jacob
Menick,
Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery: Mak-
ing all tickets winners. In ICML, 2020.
[Evci et al., 2020b] Utku Evci, Yani A Ioannou, Cem Keskin, and
Yann Dauphin. Gradient ﬂow in sparse neural networks and how
lottery tickets win. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03533, 2020.
[Frankle and Carbin, 2019] Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin.
The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
networks. In ICLR, 2019.
[Frankle et al., 2020a] Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziu-
gaite, Daniel Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear mode connectivity
and the lottery ticket hypothesis. In ICML, 2020.
[Frankle et al., 2020b] Jonathan Frankle, David J Schwab, and
Ari S Morcos. The early phase of neural network training. In
ICLR, 2020.
[Frankle et al., 2021] Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziu-
gaite, Daniel M Roy, and Michael Carbin. Pruning neural net-
works at initialization: Why are we missing the mark? In ICLR,
2021.
[Gale et al., 2019] Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker.
The state of sparsity in deep neural networks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.09574, 2019.
[Guo et al., 2016] Yiwen Guo, Anbang Yao, and Yurong Chen. Dy-
namic network surgery for efﬁcient dnns. In NeurIPS, 2016.
[Han et al., 2015] Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William J
Dally. Learning both weights and connections for efﬁcient neural
network. In NeurIPS, 2015.
[Hassibi and Stork, 1993] B. Hassibi and D. G. Stork. Second or-
der derivatives for network pruning: Optimal brain surgeon. In
NeurIPS, 1993.
[He et al., 2016] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep resid-
ual learning for image recognition. In CVPR, 2016.
[He et al., 2018] Yihui He, Ji Lin, Zhijian Liu, Hanrui Wang, Li-Jia
Li, and Song Han. AMC: Automl for model compression and
acceleration on mobile devices. In ECCV, 2018.
[Hoeﬂer et al., 2021] Torsten Hoeﬂer, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun,
Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. Sparsity in deep learning:
Pruning and growth for efﬁcient inference and training in neural
networks. JMLR, 22(241):1–124, 2021.
[Kearns et al., 1994] Michael J Kearns, Umesh Virkumar Vazirani,
and Umesh Vazirani. An introduction to computational learning
theory. MIT Press, 1994.
[Kingma and Ba, 2015] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam:
A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
[LeCun et al., 1990] Y. LeCun, J. S. Denker, and S. A. Solla. Opti-
mal brain damage. In NeurIPS, 1990.
[LeCun et al., 2015] Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey
Hinton. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553):436, 2015.
[Lee et al., 2019] Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and
Philip Torr. Snip: Single-shot network pruning based on con-
nection sensitivity. In ICLR, 2019.
[Lee et al., 2020] Namhoon
Lee,
Thalaiyasingam
Ajanthan,
Stephen Gould, and Philip HS Torr.
A signal propagation
perspective for pruning neural networks at initialization.
In
ICLR, 2020.
[Li et al., 2017] Hao Li, Asim Kadav, Igor Durdanovic, Hanan
Samet, and Hans Peter Graf. Pruning ﬁlters for efﬁcient con-
vnets. In ICLR, 2017.
[Liu et al., 2019] Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao
Huang, and Trevor Darrell.
Rethinking the value of network
pruning. In ICLR, 2019.
[Liu et al., 2021] Ning Liu, Geng Yuan, Zhengping Che, Xuan
Shen, Xiaolong Ma, Qing Jin, Jian Ren, Jian Tang, Sijia Liu, and
Yanzhi Wang. Lottery ticket implies accuracy degradation, is it a
desirable phenomenon? In ICML, 2021.


[Ma et al., 2021] Xiaolong Ma, Geng Yuan, Xuan Shen, Tianlong
Chen, Xuxi Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Ning Liu, Minghai Qin, Sijia
Liu, et al. Sanity checks for lottery tickets: Does your winning
ticket really win the jackpot? In NeurIPS, 2021.
[Malach et al., 2020] Eran Malach, Gilad Yehudai, Shai Shalev-
Shwartz, and Ohad Shamir. Proving the lottery ticket hypothesis:
Pruning is all you need. In ICML, 2020.
[Mao et al., 2017] Huizi Mao, Song Han, Jeff Pool, Wenshuo Li,
Xingyu Liu, Yu Wang, and William J Dally. Exploring the gran-
ularity of sparsity in convolutional neural networks. In CVPR
Workshop, 2017.
[Mocanu et al., 2018] Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Elena Mocanu,
Peter Stone, Phuong H Nguyen, Madeleine Gibescu, and Anto-
nio Liotta. Scalable training of artiﬁcial neural networks with
adaptive sparse connectivity inspired by network science. Nature
Communications, 9(1):1–12, 2018.
[Molchanov et al., 2017] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, and T. Karras.
Pruning convolutional neural networks for resource efﬁcient in-
ference. In ICLR, 2017.
[Molchanov et al., 2019] Pavlo Molchanov, Arun Mallya, Stephen
Tyree, Iuri Frosio, and Jan Kautz. Importance estimation for neu-
ral network pruning. In CVPR, 2019.
[Morcos et al., 2019] Ari Morcos, Haonan Yu, Michela Paganini,
and Yuandong Tian. One ticket to win them all: generalizing
lottery ticket initializations across datasets and optimizers.
In
NeurIPS, 2019.
[Mostafa and Wang, 2019] Hesham Mostafa and Xin Wang.
Pa-
rameter efﬁcient training of deep convolutional neural networks
by dynamic sparse reparameterization. In ICML, 2019.
[Mozer and Smolensky, 1989] Michael C Mozer and Paul Smolen-
sky. Skeletonization: A technique for trimming the fat from a
network via relevance assessment. In NeurIPS, 1989.
[Orseau et al., 2020] Laurent Orseau, Marcus Hutter, and Omar Ri-
vasplata. Logarithmic pruning is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2020.
[Pensia et al., 2020] Ankit Pensia, Shashank Rajput, Alliot Nagle,
Harit Vishwakarma, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Optimal lot-
tery tickets via subset sum: Logarithmic over-parameterization is
sufﬁcient. In NeurIPS, 2020.
[Ramanujan et al., 2020] Vivek Ramanujan, Mitchell Wortsman,
Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and Mohammad Rastegari.
What’s hidden in a randomly weighted neural network?
In
CVPR, 2020.
[Reed, 1993] R. Reed. Pruning algorithms – a survey. IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks, 4(5):740–747, 1993.
[Saxe et al., 2014] Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and
Surya Ganguli.
Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of
learning in deep linear neural networks. In ICLR, 2014.
[Schmidhuber, 2015] Jürgen Schmidhuber. Deep learning in neural
networks: An overview. Neural networks, 61:85–117, 2015.
[Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015] Karen Simonyan and Andrew
Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale im-
age recognition. In ICLR, 2015.
[Soltanolkotabi et al., 2018] Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, Adel Javan-
mard, and Jason D Lee. Theoretical insights into the optimization
landscape of over-parameterized shallow neural networks. TIT,
65(2):742–769, 2018.
[Sreenivasan et al., 2022] Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput, Jy-
yong Sohn, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos.
Finding everything
within random binary networks. In AISTATS, 2022.
[Su et al., 2020] Jingtong Su, Yihang Chen, Tianle Cai, Tianhao
Wu, Ruiqi Gao, Liwei Wang, and Jason D Lee. Sanity-checking
pruning methods:
Random tickets can win the jackpot.
In
NeurIPS, 2020.
[Sze et al., 2017] Vivienne Sze, Yu-Hsin Chen, Tien-Ju Yang, and
Joel S Emer. Efﬁcient processing of deep neural networks: A tu-
torial and survey. Proceedings of the IEEE, 105(12):2295–2329,
2017.
[Tanaka et al., 2020] Hidenori Tanaka, Daniel Kunin, Daniel L
Yamins, and Surya Ganguli. Pruning neural networks without
any data by iteratively conserving synaptic ﬂow.
In NeurIPS,
2020.
[Vapnik, 2013] Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning
theory. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[Wang et al., 2019a] Chaoqi Wang, Roger Grosse, Sanja Fidler,
and Guodong Zhang. Eigendamage: Structured pruning in the
kronecker-factored eigenbasis. In ICML, 2019.
[Wang et al., 2019b] Huan Wang, Xinyi Hu, Qiming Zhang, Yuehai
Wang, Lu Yu, and Haoji Hu. Structured pruning for efﬁcient con-
volutional neural networks via incremental regularization. IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 14(4):775–788,
2019.
[Wang et al., 2019c] Huan Wang, Qiming Zhang, Yuehai Wang,
Lu Yu, and Haoji Hu. Structured pruning for efﬁcient convnets
via incremental regularization. In IJCNN, 2019.
[Wang et al., 2020] Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger
Grosse. Picking winning tickets before training by preserving
gradient ﬂow. In ICLR, 2020.
[Wang et al., 2021] Huan Wang, Can Qin, Yulun Zhang, and Yun
Fu. Neural pruning via growing regularization. In ICLR, 2021.
[Wortsman et al., 2020] Mitchell Wortsman, Vivek Ramanujan,
Rosanne Liu, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mohammad Rastegari, Ja-
son Yosinski, and Ali Farhadi. Supermasks in superposition. In
NeurIPS, 2020.
[You et al., 2020] Haoran You, Chaojian Li, Pengfei Xu, Yonggan
Fu, Yue Wang, Xiaohan Chen, Richard G Baraniuk, Zhangyang
Wang, and Yingyan Lin.
Drawing early-bird tickets: Toward
more efﬁcient training of deep networks. In ICLR, 2020.
[Yu et al., 2020] Haonan Yu, Sergey Edunov, Yuandong Tian, and
Ari S Morcos. Playing the lottery with rewards and multiple lan-
guages: lottery tickets in rl and nlp. In ICLR, 2020.
[Zeng and Urtasun, 2019] Wenyuan Zeng and Raquel Urtasun. Ml-
prune: Multi-layer pruning for automated neural network com-
pression. 2019.
[Zhang et al., 2021a] Zeru Zhang, Jiayin Jin, Zijie Zhang, Yang
Zhou, Xin Zhao, Jiaxiang Ren, Ji Liu, Lingfei Wu, Ruoming Jin,
and Dejing Dou. Validating the lottery ticket hypothesis with in-
ertial manifold theory. In NeurIPS, 2021.
[Zhang et al., 2021b] Zhenyu Zhang, Xuxi Chen, Tianlong Chen,
and Zhangyang Wang. Efﬁcient lottery ticket ﬁnding: Less data
is more. In ICML, 2021.
[Zhou et al., 2019] Hattie Zhou, Janice Lan, Rosanne Liu, and Ja-
son Yosinski. Deconstructing lottery tickets: Zeros, signs, and
the supermask. In NeurIPS, 2019.
[Zou et al., 2020] Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quan-
quan Gu. Gradient descent optimizes over-parameterized deep
relu networks. 109(3):467–492, 2020.
