Pruning Early Exit Networks
Alperen Görmez and Erdem Koyuncu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois Chicago
Chicago, IL
{agorme2, ekoyuncu}@uic.edu
Abstract
Deep learning models that perform well often have high computational costs. In
this paper, we combine two approaches that try to reduce the computational cost
while keeping the model performance high: pruning and early exit networks. We
evaluate two approaches of pruning early exit networks: (1) pruning the entire
network at once, (2) pruning the base network and additional linear classiﬁers in an
ordered fashion. Experimental results show that pruning the entire network at once
is a better strategy in general. However, at high accuracy rates, the two approaches
have a similar performance, which implies that the processes of pruning and early
exit can be separated without loss of optimality.
1
Introduction
Modern deep learning models require large amount of computation to achieve good performance
Howard [2022], Brown et al. [2020]. This is undesirable for scenarios in which the model will run on
power limited devices such as mobile phones, drones and IoT devices.
The problem of reducing the amount of computation while keeping the model performance high have
been tackled from many different angles. Knowledge distillation approach aims to train a smaller
model to mimic the output of a larger model Hinton et al. [2015]. Quantization assigns less bits to
the model weights to reduce the computational cost Shen et al. [2020], Han et al. [2015]. Adaptive
computation methods propose skipping some parts of the model based on the input Figurnov et al.
[2017], Veit and Belongie [2018], Wang et al. [2018]. Pruning methods remove redundant weights
in the network Li et al. [2016], Blalock et al. [2020], Liu et al. [2018]. Early exit networks have
additional exit points so that not every sample will have to go through the entire network Gormez
et al. [2022], Kaya et al. [2019], Teerapittayanon et al. [2016].
Most early exit networks have two components: an off-the-shelf base network, and additional small
classiﬁers Gormez et al. [2022], Kaya et al. [2019], Teerapittayanon et al. [2016]. Until now, no work
has been done to prune early exit networks. This paper aims to ﬁll this gap. In particular, we evaluate
the performance of two strategies. In the ﬁrst strategy, we prune and train the additional internal
classiﬁers that enable early exit jointly with the base network. In the second strategy, we ﬁrst prune
and train the base network, and then the classiﬁers. The signiﬁcance of the second strategy is that its
optimality implies one can separate the processes of early exit and pruning without loss of optimality.
2
Experiment
We compare the following two approaches using a ResNet-56 and CIFAR-10 He et al. [2016],
Krizhevsky et al. [2009]:
1. Multiple linear layers are added to a ResNet-56 (the resulting network is a Shallow-Deep
Network Kaya et al. [2019]) and the entire model is pruned.
Sparsity in Neural Networks Workshop 2022.
arXiv:2207.03644v1  [cs.LG]  8 Jul 2022


2. A ResNet-56 is pruned, multiple linear layers are added to the resulting network and then
these linear layers are pruned.
The number, locations, and the architectures of the additional linear layers are as described in Kaya
et al. [2019]. For both approaches, pruning is followed by ﬁne tuning. The procedure of pruning and
ﬁne tuning is repeated 20 times. At each pruning phase, 10% of the weights are pruned using global
unstructured l1 norm based pruning. At each ﬁne tuning phase, the model is trained for 10 epochs.
Accuracy vs. FLOPs graphs are obtained using different conﬁdence thresholds and applying time
sharing as in Gormez et al. [2022], Kaya et al. [2019].
(a) Sparsity rates of the weights of each layer after 20 iterations of pruning and ﬁne tuning.
(b) The exit performances after 20 iterations of prun-
ing and ﬁne tuning. Each point corresponds to the
scenario where all samples exit from that exit loca-
tion. Black curve represents the performance before
any pruning.
(c) Accuracy-FLOPs plot. Samples exit from differ-
ent exit points due to conﬁdence thresholds. Black
curve represents the performance before any prun-
ing.
Figure 1: The sparsity rates and exit performances for Approach 1.
3
Results
3.1
Approach 1
The sparsity rate of each layer’s weights and the exit performances after 20 iterations of pruning and
ﬁne tuning are shown in Fig. 1. We can make the following observations:
1. Deeper layers are pruned slightly more than earlier layers, and ﬁnal exit is pruned much less
than earlier exits as seen from Fig. 1a.
2. Despite extensive pruning, exit performances at earlier exits are comparable with the
unpruned baseline, and even better at the ﬁrst and second exit points as seen from Fig. 1b.
This suggests pruning can improve model performance.
3. Performance at the last exit is most likely hurt by the joint training of all linear classiﬁers.
4. Pruning reduces the computational cost up to around 20% without loss of performance.
Best accuracy obtained with pruning is around 4% less than the unpruned baseline, but the
computational cost is reduced to half as seen from Fig. 1c.
2


3.2
Approach 2
In this approach, the ResNet-56 is pruned and ﬁne tuned ﬁrst. Then, linear layers are added to the
model and these layers are pruned and ﬁne tuned. The sparsity rate of each layer’s weights and the
exit performances after 20 iterations of pruning and ﬁne tuning are shown in Fig. 2. We can make the
following observations:
1. Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b shows that although the ﬁnal exit went through two pruning phases (one
with base network, one with additional linear classiﬁers), it is not pruned much.
2. Except the last exit, deeper exits are pruned more than earlier exits as seen from Fig. 2a and
Fig. 2b.
3. Compared to Fig. 1, linear layers become more sparse as seen from Fig. 2b.
4. Unpruned baseline in Fig. 2c has high accuracy only at the last exit because earlier exits are
attached after the base network was pruned and ﬁne tuned. The additional linear classiﬁers
were not trained at this point.
5. Fine tuning linear layers pushes the computational cost up as seen in Fig. 2d, which is
interesting.
(a) Sparsity rates for the base network’s layers after
20 iterations of pruning and ﬁne tuning.
(b) Sparsity rates for the additional classiﬁers after
20 iterations of pruning and ﬁne tuning.
(c) The exit performances after 20 iterations of prun-
ing and ﬁne tuning. Each point corresponds to the
scenario where all samples exit from that exit loca-
tion. Black curve represents the performance before
any pruning.
(d) Accuracy-FLOPs plot. Samples exit from differ-
ent exit points due to conﬁdence thresholds. Black
curve represents the performance before any prun-
ing.
Figure 2: The sparsity rates and exit performances for Approach 2.
3.3
Comparison
The exit performances of the two approaches are shown in Fig. 3. From Fig. 3a, it can be seen that
that pruning all layers at the same time performs better at earlier exit points compared to pruning
3


(a) The exit performances of the approaches.
(b) Accuracy-FLOPs plots of the approaches.
Figure 3: Comparison of the approaches.
the layers in an ordered fashion. However, ordered pruning approach performs better at deeper exit
points which give the best performance.
In terms of computational cost, pruning all layers at once reduces the computational cost by up to
15% compared to ordered pruning, but the performances are close at high accuracy rates as seen from
Fig. 3b. Both approaches are able to reduce the computational cost by half at the cost of 4% decrease
in the accuracy.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we considered the problem of pruning early exit architectures. We evaluated the
performance of two strategies in particular. First, intermediate classiﬁers are pruned jointly with
the base network. Second, the base network is pruned ﬁrst, followed by the intermediate classiﬁers.
Although the former strategy outperforms the latter in general, the performance of the two strategies
are close at high accuracy rates. Therefore, the processes of pruning and early exit can potentially be
separated without signiﬁcant penalty in performance.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was supported in part by Army Research Lab (ARL) under Grant W911NF-21-2-0272,
National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant CNS-2148182, and by an award from the University
of Illinois at Chicago Discovery Partners Institute Seed Funding Program.
References
Davis Blalock, Jose Javier Gonzalez Ortiz, Jonathan Frankle, and John Guttag. What is the state of
neural network pruning? Proceedings of machine learning and systems, 2:129–146, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Michael Figurnov, Maxwell D Collins, Yukun Zhu, Li Zhang, Jonathan Huang, Dmitry Vetrov, and
Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Spatially adaptive computation time for residual networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1039–1048, 2017.
Alperen Gormez, Venkat Dasari, and Erdem Koyuncu. E2cm: Early exit via class means for efﬁcient
supervised and unsupervised learning. In IEEE World Congress on Computational Intelligence
(WCCI): International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2022.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks
with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.
4


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 770–778, 2016.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015.
J. Howard. Which image models are best? Kaggle, 2022. URL https://www.kaggle.com/code/
jhoward/which-image-models-are-best.
Yigitcan Kaya, Sanghyun Hong, and Tudor Dumitras. Shallow-deep networks: Understanding
and mitigating network overthinking. In International conference on machine learning, pages
3301–3310. PMLR, 2019.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Hao Li, Asim Kadav, Igor Durdanovic, Hanan Samet, and Hans Peter Graf. Pruning ﬁlters for
efﬁcient convnets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.08710, 2016.
Zhuang Liu, Mingjie Sun, Tinghui Zhou, Gao Huang, and Trevor Darrell. Rethinking the value of
network pruning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05270, 2018.
Jianghao Shen, Yue Wang, Pengfei Xu, Yonggan Fu, Zhangyang Wang, and Yingyan Lin. Fractional
skipping: Towards ﬁner-grained dynamic cnn inference. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 34, pages 5700–5708, 2020.
Surat Teerapittayanon, Bradley McDanel, and Hsiang-Tsung Kung. Branchynet: Fast inference
via early exiting from deep neural networks. In 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern
Recognition (ICPR), pages 2464–2469. IEEE, 2016.
Andreas Veit and Serge Belongie. Convolutional networks with adaptive inference graphs. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 3–18, 2018.
Xin Wang, Fisher Yu, Zi-Yi Dou, Trevor Darrell, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Skipnet: Learning dynamic
routing in convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), pages 409–424, 2018.
5
