APPLICATION OF KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION TO MULTI-TASK
SPEECH REPRESENTATION LEARNING
∗Mine Kerpicci1
Van Nguyen2
Shuhua Zhang2
Erik Visser2
1 Georgia Institue of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia
2 Qualcomm Technologies, Inc., San Diego, California
Abstract
Model architectures such as wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT have
been proposed to learn speech representations from audio wave-
forms in a self-supervised manner. When they are combined
with downstream tasks such as keyword spotting and speaker
veriﬁcation, they provide state-of-the-art performance. How-
ever, these models use a large number of parameters, the small-
est version of which has 95 million parameters. This constitutes
a challenge for edge AI device deployments. In this paper, we
investigate the application of knowledge distillation to speech
representation learning (SRL) models followed by joint ﬁne-
tuning with multiple downstream voice-activated tasks. In our
experiments on two such tasks, our approach results in nearly
75% reduction in model size while suffering only 0.1% accu-
racy and 0.9% equal error rate degradation compared to the
full-size model. In addition, we show that ﬁne-tuning the SRL
models results in a signiﬁcant performance boost compared to
using frozen SRL models.
Index Terms: Speech representation learning, multi-task train-
ing, wav2vec, HuBERT, knowledge distillation
1. Introduction
Speech representation learning (SRL) has been extensively
studied in the literature and shown potential for various speech
recognition tasks [1, 2, 3].
Deep neural network architec-
tures [4, 5] are the method of choice for SRL. Since sufﬁcient
amounts of labeled data are not typically available for super-
vised learning in real scenarios, this problem is circumvented by
using self-supervised learning on unlabeled data [6, 7, 8, 9, 10].
In [6, 7], convolutional networks are combined with trans-
former encoder-based models to learn speech representations
in a self-supervised manner. [11, 12, 13] propose to combine
such a model with a downstream network to address classiﬁca-
tion problems such as emotion recognition or speaker recogni-
tion. The resulting models provide competitive performance on
these tasks but require training multiple large networks each for
a different single task. To enable models for multi-tasking, [14]
proposes to learn speech representations from raw audio with
wav2vec 2.0 [6] and then ﬁne-tune the model for multiple tasks
simultaneously by sampling training instances from the com-
bined task-speciﬁc datasets. This method provides even better
performance than training on single tasks separately.
However, the memory footprint of the resulting models is
large with the number of parameters ranging from 95 million to
1 billion, which makes them difﬁcult to deploy on edge AI de-
vices. This problem is studied with parameter sharing in [15].
Knowledge distillation is another method of choice to address
⋆Work performed as an intern at Qualcomm Technologies
model complexity reduction in various ﬁelds ranging from nat-
ural language processing to speech recognition [16, 17, 18]. A
common approach in the literature is to reduce model size by
maintaining its performance via teacher-student network distil-
lation architectures. [19, 20] apply knowledge distillation to
large SRL methods to construct efﬁcient speech recognition net-
works. The conventional approach is transferring knowledge
from the ﬁnal layer of the teacher network to the ﬁnal predic-
tion of the student network. However, the middle layers of these
SRL models also contain valuable speech representation infor-
mation [21]. In [22], layer-wise distillation to the HuBERT [7]
model is applied where knowledge is transferred from middle
layers of the large network to construct a smaller model.
In our work, we discuss generalization of knowledge dis-
tillation to use a large network in training of another network
with reduced model size, and we use a special knowledge dis-
tillation approach as presented in [22] in our experiments. As
opposed to this approach, we combine the student model with
linear downstream heads and ﬁne-tune all network parameters
via a multi-task training scheme as in [14] instead of freezing
the SRL model as done in [22]. In our experiments, we address
keyword spotting and speaker veriﬁcation problems in single
task and multi-task frameworks. Through our results, we show
that the constructed student networks perform as well as the
teacher models even though the former model size is 28% of the
latter. Moreover, we perform this in two settings where we con-
struct distilled SRL modules with wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT
separately for a comprehensive performance comparison.
To the best of our knowledge, we propose for the ﬁrst
time the combination of knowledge distillation application to
SRL and joint ﬁne-tuning of the complete model (SRL mod-
ule and downstream heads) for multiple downstream voice-
activated tasks. This is in contrast to common speech recog-
nition multi-task training approaches where an SRL module is
frozen, functioning as a feature extractor, and only the down-
stream speech recognition tasks are trained [22, 23]. On the
contrary, we show that ﬁne-tuning both distilled SRL module
and downstream heads for multiple voice-activated tasks simul-
taneously achieves signiﬁcantly higher performance on all such
tasks compared to ﬁne-tuning only the downstream heads with
frozen SRL module.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We successfully combine knowledge distillation and multi-
task training to construct a single network (with about 75%
reduced size) that can be efﬁciently used in devices and em-
bedded systems for multiple tasks.
• We show that training the complete network end-to-end
(both SRL module and downstream heads) on multiple tasks
achieves signiﬁcantly higher performance than training on
the same tasks with the frozen SRL module.
arXiv:2210.16611v2  [eess.AS]  19 May 2023


j
m
i
t
1
Teacher Network
p
n
2
n-1
1
Student Network
𝐿!
…
…
…
…
…
…
𝐿"
𝐿#
𝐿$%!
𝐿$
…
…
+
+
𝐿: Total Distillation 
Loss
Unlabeled 
Data
(a)
p
n
1
Student Network
…
…
Task 1 
Training Data
Task K 
Training Data
…
1
K
…
Downstream 
Networks
Task 1 Loss 
Function: 𝐹!
Task K Loss 
Function: 𝐹"
…
(b)
Figure 1: Flowchart of (a) the knowledge distillation process where the student network is trained via hidden layers of the pre-trained
teacher network (distillation can be performed among any desired layers with a suitable loss function choice), (b) the ﬁne-tuning step
where the distilled network is trained with a multi-task training scheme.
• We discuss generalization of the used methods (knowledge
distillation and multi-task training) and show that they can
be efﬁciently applied to different networks where we achieve
competitive results with both distilled wav2vec 2.0 and dis-
tilled HuBERT models on keyword spotting (KWS) and
speaker veriﬁcation (SV) voice-activated tasks.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our
approach in detail, Section 3 presents experiments conducted to
validate our approach and we conclude with Section 4.
2. METHOD
We apply the student-teacher approach [16] to construct our
SRL module. We use wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT models as
our teacher network as discussed in Section 2.1 and apply dis-
tillation method explained in Section 2.2. Then, we ﬁne-tune
the student model and downstream network with the multi-task
training approach in Section 2.3. We provide the ﬂowchart of
the complete process in Figure 1. Note that the proposed end-
to-end training scheme can be applied to various teacher-student
models for several tasks. Here, in particular, we investigate its
application to SRL models and present our experimental analy-
sis on multiple voice-activated tasks.
2.1. Speech Representation Learning
HuBERT [7] and wav2vec 2.0 [6] methods are capable of learn-
ing powerful speech representations from audio waveforms in a
self-supervised manner. They share the same architecture con-
sisting of CNN and transformer encoder layers. Their BASE
model corresponding to the smallest version contains 95 million
parameters while LARGE model contains 317 million parame-
ters. HuBERT has an additional X-LARGE model with 1 billion
parameters. While sharing a similar structure, differences result
from their pre-training schemes. The wav2vec 2.0 model has a
single step of training with a quantization process to learn the
targets. HuBERT, however, ﬁrst constructs the pseudo-targets
in a separate clustering step and then learns these targets in the
second step during training. As a result, each of their hidden
layers learns different properties of speech representation and
transfers various abilities when they are used for distillation.
In our experiments, we investigate both wav2vec 2.0 and
HuBERT as our teacher network for knowledge distillation to
construct separate student networks. Then, we evaluate these in
two settings to compare the performance of ﬁnal student models
and to show the applicability of the discussed processes.
2.2. Knowledge Distillation
Deep architectures achieve state-of-the-art performance in
many tasks due to their high learning capacities. However, their
deployment in mobile devices and embedded systems is a chal-
lenging problem due to cost and memory limitations. In the lit-
erature, this problem is addressed with the idea of transferring
knowledge from such models to smaller networks to reduce net-
work size while keeping the performance similar.
Knowledge distillation is a method that transfers knowledge
from layers of a large pre-trained network (teacher) to a simpler
or smaller model (student) as demonstrated in Figure 1a. As
in this generalized representation, the transfer can be performed
among any layers of the teacher and the student networks where
the teacher guides the student through a deﬁned loss function
during pre-training [16]. Several studies have suggested that not
only the ﬁnal layer but also the middle layers of SRL modules
contain valuable information [21, 24]. Hence, it is proposed to
transfer knowledge from middle layers of teacher as well as its
ﬁnal layer to learn the hidden representations [22]. We use this
approach in our pre-training as a special case of the process in
Figure 1a. In this method, knowledge is transferred between
only some of the student and teacher layers via feature vectors
as in the diagram in Figure 2a. The student parameters are ini-
tialized with their corresponding layers in the teacher network
and trained with the loss function
Lp =
T
X
i=1
 1
K ||f p,i −¯f p,i||1 −log σ

cos(f p,i, ¯f p,i)

.
This function is separately calculated for all hidden layers
where distillation is performed.
Here, T is the number of
time steps and K is the dimension of feature vectors where
f p and ¯f p are the feature vectors of the pth distillation layer
of the teacher and student models, respectively. Moreover, σ
is sigmoid function and cos is cosine similarity. The aim of
this loss function is to minimize L1 distance while maximiz-
ing the cosine similarity between the feature vectors. Note that


j
i
12
1
Teacher Network
2
1
3
1
Student Network
𝐿!
…
…
𝐿"
𝐿#
+
+
𝐿: Total Distillation 
Loss
Audio 
Waveform
CNN
CNN
2
2
…
Transformer
Transformer
Distillation Layers
𝑓!
"𝑓!
"𝑓"
"𝑓#
𝑓"
𝑓#
(a)
Transformer
Student Network
Keyword Spotting
Training Data
Speaker Verification 
Training Data
KWS
SV
Linear Downstream 
Networks
Loss Function: 
Cross-Entropy
Loss Function: 
Angular Softmax
1
CNN
2
2
1
3
Distillation Layers
(b)
Figure 2: Flowchart of (a) the distillation process where the student model with CNN and Transformer layers is trained via teacher
network layers, (b) the ﬁne-tuning step where the complete distilled network is trained with a multi-task training scheme for keyword
spotting and speaker veriﬁcation tasks.
this method can be applied to the networks in various forms by
changing the loss functions accordingly.
2.3. Multi-task Training
We combine the pre-trained student network with downstream
networks to perform multi-task training. For this, we use sep-
arate downstream heads for KWS and SV tasks. Note that the
choice of downstream heads can vary based on the applications.
In our study, we use a linear layer that maps the output of stu-
dent network to task speciﬁc vectors as in Figure 2b to keep the
network size small.
In our work, we apply a special multi-task training method
where we ﬁne-tune all network parameters (both distilled stu-
dent network and downstream heads) for all tasks simultane-
ously [14]. In each iteration, we ﬁrst train all parameters based
on the cross-entropy loss function with the KWS dataset and
then use the angular softmax loss with the SV dataset. We alter-
nate between the loss functions and batches of the tasks at each
iteration. This alteration between both tasks continues until the
deﬁned maximum number of iterations is reached.
Note that the concept of multi-task learning in the literature
is commonly considered as ﬁne-tuning multiple downstream
heads on their own datasets after freezing the SRL module that
they are sharing [22, 23]. However, in this study, we discuss
the multi-task training scheme where the SRL module is also
trained with the datasets of all downstream tasks one-by-one
during ﬁne-tuning. This training scheme allows the SRL mod-
ule to adapt its learning capability to the downstream tasks more
while increasing its performance on all trained tasks. In our
experiments, we provide the performance results of both train-
ing approaches and show that applying this multi-task training
scheme without freezing the SRL module achieve signiﬁcant
performance gain in all investigated setups and tasks.
3. EXPERIMENTS
3.1. Experimental Setup
In our experiments, we evaluate the performance of the student
networks after distillation on single task and multi-task frame-
works. We perform our experiments in two settings where we
use different models as teacher networks. For knowledge distil-
Table 1: The models constructed with the proposed approach
and evaluated in the experiments where their number of param-
eters and ﬁne-tuned network parts are presented.
Model
#
Parameters
Fine-tuned Parameters
wav2vec 2.0
96 M
SRL Module + Downstream Heads
wav2vec 2.0 (frozen)
96 M
Downstream Heads
DistilledWav2vec
27 M
SRL Module + Downstream Heads
DistilledWav2vec (frozen)
27 M
Downstream Heads
DistilledHuBERT
27 M
SRL Module + Downstream Heads
DistilledHuBERT (frozen)
27 M
Downstream Heads
lation, we use BASE models of wav2vec 2.0 [6] and HuBERT
[7], where they have the same architecture of CNN and 12 trans-
former layers resulting in 95 million parameters. Note that they
are both pre-trained with 960-hour LibriSpeech data [25] to
learn speech representations in their own training settings.
The student networks are smaller and simpliﬁed versions
of the teacher architectures. They consist of CNN and 2 trans-
former layers as in Figure 2 where their parameters are initial-
ized with the parameters of CNN and 1st and 2nd transformer
layers of the teacher network. Then, we perform the knowl-
edge distillation from the layers 4, 8 and 12 with the same 960-
hour LibriSpeech data. The resulting student models with dis-
tillation and downstream layers contain 27 million parameters.
We refer to these distilled student networks with downstream
heads as “DistilledWav2vec” and “DistilledHuBERT”.
Note
that we keep the layers after distillation, and we ﬁne-tune all
network parameters including CNN and transformer layers on
downstream tasks. For comparison, we also include the per-
formance of the models when all layers are frozen except the
downstream heads during ﬁne-tuning step which is called as
partial ﬁne-tuning.
We refer to these versions as “Distilled-
Wav2vec (frozen)” and “DistilledHuBERT (frozen)”. The prop-
erties of the constructed models regarding the number of param-
eters and their ﬁne-tuned parts are provided in Table 1 with their
model names as referred in the experimental results.
We perform our experiments in both single task and multi-
task frameworks for a comprehensive analysis. In these exper-
iments, we use keyword spotting and speaker veriﬁcation tasks


Table 2: The results of single task experiments performed on
keyword spotting and speaker veriﬁcation tasks seperately.
Model
#
Parameters
Training
Task
KWS
Accuracy (%)
SV
EER (%)
wav2vec 2.0 [14]
96 M
KWS
98.10
-
wav2vec 2.0 [14]
96 M
SV
-
3.35
DistilledWav2vec
27 M
KWS
98.01
-
DistilledWav2vec
27 M
SV
-
4.48
DistilledHuBERT
27 M
KWS
97.82
-
DistilledHuBERT
27 M
SV
-
4.26
to train the networks for various voice-activated tasks.
For keyword spotting (KWS), we use the Google Speech
Command (GSC) V1 dataset [26] with 22236 train and 3081
test utterances of 12 classes and provide accuracy results on the
test set. Also, we use VoxCeleb-1 dataset [27] with 143642
train and 4874 test utterances for speaker veriﬁcation (SV) with
Equal Error Rate (EER) evaluation metric. In the experiments,
we use Adam optimizer with a learning rate 10−4. Note that we
also provide the performance of teacher wav2vec 2.0 model as
a reference since our aim is to achieve the performance of such
a powerful and large network with much smaller networks.
3.2. Single Task Results
In this section, we provide our experimental results regarding
the single task setting. We construct two different student net-
works as DistilledWav2vec and DistilledHuBERT from differ-
ent teachers. We train them separately for single tasks of KWS
and SV. Note that this is different from the multi-task training
scheme described in Section 2.3. Here, the networks are trained
for only one task at each time.
We provide the evaluation results on test sets in Table 2.
As seen from the accuracy and EER values, the student mod-
els perform well on both KWS and SV tasks. Particularly, we
observe only 0.1% accuracy degradation on the KWS task with
DistilledWav2vec compared to the teacher wav2vec 2.0. More-
over, we obtain only 0.9% EER degradation on SV with Dis-
tilledHuBERT even though the student networks’ size is only
28% of the large teacher network.
In this set of experiments on single task, we show that the
knowledge distillation method can be efﬁciently applied to var-
ious networks to reduce the model size while maintaining the
performance. However, these models are trained to work on
only one task. In the next section, we aim to achieve similar
competitive results on multiple tasks with a single network.
3.3. Multi-Task Results
We perform multi-task training on the student networks Dis-
tilledWav2vec and DistilledHuBERT. In this case, we train the
networks with KWS and SV tasks simultaneously where the
resulting networks can be used in devices with multi-task appli-
cations efﬁciently.
We obtain the evaluation results as in Table 3.
In this
setting, training the complete network (both SRL module and
dowsntream heads) instead of freezing the SRL module pro-
vides 8.41% and 6.63% accuracy gains on KWS, respectively
for DistilledWav2vec and DistilledHuBERT models. Similarly
on the SV task, these models obtain 10.42% and 8.40% EER
improvements due to the discussed multi-task training scheme.
Based on these accuracy and EER values, we observe that en-
tire ﬁne-tuned models perform better than partial ﬁne-tuned ver-
Table 3: The results of multi-task experiments performed simul-
taneously for keyword spotting and speaker veriﬁcation.
Model
#
Parameters
KWS
Accuracy (%)
SV
EER (%)
wav2vec 2.0 [14]
96 M
98.19
3.15
wav2vec 2.0 (frozen) [14]
96 M
90.33
20.5
DistilledWav2vec
27 M
97.70
4.59
DistilledWav2vec (frozen)
27 M
89.29
15.01
DistilledHuBERT
27 M
97.90
4.27
DistilledHuBERT (frozen)
27 M
91.27
12.67
sions in all cases. Hence, we conclude that training not only
downstream heads but also SRL modules with the multi-task
training scheme signiﬁcantly increases the overall performance.
Moreover, we observe that both DistilledHuBERT and Dis-
tilledWav2vec models that are trained in a multi-task framework
provide similar results with their single task comparisons. Par-
ticularly, when DistilledHuBERT is trained solely on the KWS
task, it achieves 97.82 % accuracy and when it is trained solely
on SV, it has 4.26 % EER as in Table 2. On the other hand,
when we ﬁne-tune DistilledHuBERT on both KWS and SV at
the same time, we achieve 97.90 % accuracy on KWS and 4.27
% EER on SV as in Table 3. This shows that, instead of us-
ing a different network for each task, we can achieve similar
competitive performance results on multiple tasks with a sin-
gle network by applying ﬁne-tuning to both SRL module and
downstream heads in a multi-task training scheme. Hence, the
resulting network can be efﬁciently deployed and used for mul-
tiple tasks by achieving high performance with low memory and
computational costs.
Finally, we conclude that both DistilledHuBERT and Dis-
tilledWav2vec student networks after entire ﬁne-tuning in
multi-task training setting reach competitive performances. Par-
ticularly for KWS task, the performance gap between teacher
and student networks is small. This means that we can match
the large network performance with a much smaller model even
in a multi-task application framework.
4. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we apply a knowledge distillation approach to
different self-supervised networks to obtain high speech repre-
sentation learning performance with reduced network size and
illustrate its generalization to different settings. We perform
single task and multi-task trainings for various speech recog-
nition applications and provide a comprehensive performance
comparisons. Particularly, we propose to combine knowledge
distillation and multi-task training scheme where the complete
network of SRL module and downstream heads is ﬁne-tuned
with all task datasets simultaneously to obtain a single network
that can be efﬁciently used for multiple tasks. In our experi-
ments, we show that the performance of large models such as
wav2vec 2.0 and HuBERT can be achieved with substantially
smaller networks (28% of the original model sizes) by using the
training approach presented. Moreover, we show that the per-
formance of single task networks on their particular tasks can
be achieved with a single network ﬁne-tuned on multiple tasks.
Hence, these multi-task models do not only provide high per-
formance, but also reduce memory and computation costs by al-
lowing a single network to be shared among multiple tasks. The
resulting networks are thus potential candidates for deployment
on edge AI devices while offering competitive performance.


5. References
[1] A. T. Liu, S.-w. Yang, P.-H. Chi, P.-c. Hsu, and H.-y. Lee, “Mock-
ingjay: Unsupervised speech representation learning with deep
bidirectional transformer encoders,” in IEEE ICASSP, 2020.
[2] T. Sercu, G. Saon, J. Cui, X. Cui, B. Ramabhadran, B. Kingsbury,
and A. Sethy, “Network architectures for multilingual speech rep-
resentation learning,” in IEEE ICASSP, 2017.
[3] Y.-A. Chung, W.-N. Hsu, H. Tang, and J. Glass, “An Unsuper-
vised Autoregressive Model for Speech Representation Learning,”
in Proc. Interspeech, 2019, pp. 146–150.
[4] S. Latif, R. Rana, S. Khalifa, R. Jurdak, J. Qadir, and B. W.
Schuller, “Survey of deep representation learning for speech emo-
tion recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, pp.
1–1, 2021.
[5] G. Trigeorgis, F. Ringeval, R. Brueckner, E. Marchi, M. A. Nico-
laou, B. Schuller, and S. Zafeiriou, “Adieu features? End-to-end
speech emotion recognition using a deep convolutional recurrent
network,” in IEEE ICASSP, 2016, pp. 5200–5204.
[6] A. Baevski, Y. Zhou, A. Mohamed, and M. Auli, “wav2vec 2.0:
A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representa-
tions,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 33, 2020.
[7] W.-N. Hsu, B. Bolte, Y.-H. H. Tsai, K. Lakhotia, R. Salakhutdi-
nov, and A. Mohamed, “HuBERT: Self-Supervised Speech Rep-
resentation Learning by Masked Prediction of Hidden Units,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Pro-
cessing, vol. 29, 2021.
[8] A. T. Liu, S.-W. Li, and H.-y. Lee, “Tera: Self-supervised learn-
ing of transformer encoder representation for speech,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
vol. 29, pp. 2351–2366, 2021.
[9] Z. Chen, S. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Qian, C. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Qian,
and M. Zeng, “Large-scale self-supervised speech representation
learning for automatic speaker veriﬁcation,” in IEEE ICASSP,
2022, pp. 6147–6151.
[10] A. Baevski, S. Schneider, and M. Auli, “vq-wav2vec:
Self-
supervised learning of discrete speech representations,” in Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[11] L. Pepino, P. Riera, and L. Ferrer, “Emotion Recognition from
Speech Using wav2vec 2.0 Embeddings,” in Proc. Interspeech,
2021, pp. 3400–3404.
[12] E. Morais, R. Hoory, W. Zhu, I. Gat, M. Damasceno, and
H. Aronowitz, “Speech emotion recognition using self-supervised
features,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 6922–6926.
[13] N. Vaessen and D. A. Van Leeuwen, “Fine-tuning wav2vec2 for
speaker recognition,” in IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 7967–
7971.
[14] S. Hussain, V. Nguyen, S. Zhang, and E. Visser, “Multi-task voice
activated framework using self-supervised learning,” in IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
ing (ICASSP), 2022, pp. 6137–6141.
[15] D.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee, J.-H. Mo, and J.-H. Chang, “W2V2-Light:
A Lightweight Version of Wav2vec 2.0 for Automatic Speech
Recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2022.
[16] J. Gou, B. Yu, S. J. Maybank, and D. Tao, “Knowledge distilla-
tion: A survey,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol.
129, no. 6, pp. 1789–1819, 2021.
[17] A. Gresse, M. Quillot, R. Dufour, and J.-F. Bonastre, “Learn-
ing Voice Representation Using Knowledge Distillation for Au-
tomatic Voice Casting,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2020, pp. 160–164.
[18] G. Kurata and G. Saon, “Knowledge Distillation from Ofﬂine to
Streaming RNN Transducer for End-to-End Speech Recognition,”
in Proc. Interspeech, 2020, pp. 2117–2121.
[19] Z. Peng, A. Budhkar, I. Tuil, J. Levy, P. Sobhani, R. Cohen, and
J. Nassour, “Shrinking bigfoot: Reducing wav2vec 2.0 footprint,”
in Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Simple and Efﬁcient
Natural Language Processing.
Virtual: Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, Nov. 2021, pp. 134–141.
[20] R. Wang, Q. Bai, J. Ao, L. Zhou, Z. Xiong, Z. Wei, Y. Zhang,
T. Ko, and H. Li, “LightHuBERT: Lightweight and Conﬁgurable
Speech Representation Learning with Once-for-All Hidden-Unit
BERT,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2022.
[21] A. Pasad, J.-C. Chou, and K. Livescu, “Layer-wise analysis of a
self-supervised speech representation model,” in IEEE Automatic
Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), 2021,
pp. 914–921.
[22] H.-J. Chang, S.-w. Yang, and H.-y. Lee, “DistilHuBERT: Speech
Representation Learning by Layer-Wise Distillation of Hidden-
Unit BERT,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2022.
[23] S. wen Yang, P.-H. Chi, Y.-S. Chuang, C.-I. J. Lai, K. Lakhotia,
Y. Y. Lin, A. T. Liu, J. Shi, X. Chang, G.-T. Lin, T.-H. Huang,
W.-C. Tseng, K. tik Lee, D.-R. Liu, Z. Huang, S. Dong, S.-W.
Li, S. Watanabe, A. Mohamed, and H. yi Lee, “SUPERB: Speech
Processing Universal PERformance Benchmark,” in Proc. Inter-
speech, 2021, pp. 1194–1198.
[24] X. Chang, T. Maekaku, P. Guo, J. Shi, Y.-J. Lu, A. S. Subrama-
nian, T. Wang, S.-w. Yang, Y. Tsao, H.-y. Lee, and S. Watan-
abe, “An exploration of self-supervised pretrained representations
for end-to-end speech recognition,” in IEEE Automatic Speech
Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU), 2021, pp.
228–235.
[25] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Lib-
rispeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,”
in IEEE ICASSP, 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
[26] P. Warden, “Speech commands: A dataset for limited-vocabulary
speech recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03209, 2018.
[27] A. Nagrani, J. S. Chung, and A. Zisserman, “VoxCeleb: A Large-
Scale Speaker Identiﬁcation Dataset,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2017,
pp. 2616–2620.
