Efficient LLM Context Distillation
Rajesh Upadhayaya1, Manish Raj Osti1, Zachary Smith1, Christopher Kottmyer1
1School of Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA
upadraj@gatech.edu, mrosti@gatech.edu, zsmith73@gatech.edu, ckottmyer3@gatech.edu
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate profi-
ciency across diverse tasks but often require targeted adap-
tations for specific applications.
Various methods have
been proposed to facilitate this adaptation, including few-
shot fine-tuning, in-context learning, and context distilla-
tion. This paper specifically investigates context distillation
— a method that extends the utility of task-specific exam-
ples by internalizing them, thus augmenting the example
set accessible for model inference. We conduct a compar-
ative analysis of context distillation with in-context learn-
ing (ICL) and few-shot fine-tuning (FT), aiming to ascer-
tain the efficacy of context distillation in adapting models
using minimal in-context examples.
Employing matched
datasets from Mobach, our experiments leverage OPT mod-
els of various sizes. The results indicate that context distil-
lation effectively adapts models, with student models attain-
ing comparable in-domain and out-of-domain accuracies to
in-context learning. Although context distillation surpasses
ICL in out-of-domain generalization, it does not achieve the
performance levels of FT. However, the reduced dataset size
and computational demands position context distillation as
a viable alternative, especially for smaller datasets. Over-
all, this study presents context distillation as an efficient and
potent method for customizing LLMs to specific tasks.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLM) excel at knowledge ex-
traction and reasoning, but often require adaptation to indi-
vidual tasks. There are several proposed methods to per-
form this adaptation including, but not limited to, few-
shot fine-tuning, in-context learning, and context distilla-
tion. Each method has its own advantages and disadvan-
tages. For example, few-shot fine-tuning (FT) requires sub-
stantial amounts of task specific data, which poses a chal-
lenge when labeled examples are scarce. In-context learn-
ing (ICL) attempts to alleviate FT data needs by providing
fewer examples through the query prompt used during in-
ference. However, LLM have a constrained context win-
dow that is both consumed by task examples and limit the
number of examples that models can learn from. Given
this constrained context window, context distillation (CD)
extends accessible task-specific examples by internalizing
them, greatly increasing the number of available examples
outside of the query prompt [1]. This not only limits the
number of task examples these models can learn from si-
multaneously but also affects their ability to integrate and
recall relevant information across different parts of the text.
Context distillation (CD) addresses these limitations by al-
lowing a model to internalize and condense key informa-
tion from task-specific examples. This process effectively
extends the usable information beyond what is immediately
present in the query prompt, increasing the number of ex-
amples the model can learn from and utilize, without being
directly constrained by the size of the context window.
In this paper, we explore context distillation by directly
comparing our results to the ICL results in Mosbach et al.
[6]. Mosbach et al. show that ICL is a viable task adap-
tation method despite it under-performance relative to FT.
A plausible explanation for this under-performance is that
FT learns from many training examples whereas ICL learns
from only a few in-context examples provided during infer-
ence. This results in ICL having less data for task gener-
alization. By contrast, context distillation strikes a balance
between the large number of examples required for FT and
the small number of examples that fit into the context win-
dow of ICL. Additionally, Snell et al. shows that CD out-
performs direct gradient descent learning [9]. Thus, it is
hypothesized that context distillation should perform better
than ICL without requiring as many training examples as
FT.
Our goal is to demonstrate that context distillation can be
performant by using only a few in-context examples. This
not only signifies efficient training data utilization but also
showcases task-specific improvements relative to conven-
tional fine-tuning methods trained on small datasets. When
combined with the efficiency gains of low-rank adapta-
tion layers (LoRa), context distillation becomes an efficient
training method for learning task specific adaptations and
provides increased flexibility. To accomplish this a fixed
1
arXiv:2409.01930v2  [cs.LG]  12 May 2025


reference model with task-specific LoRa layers is used dur-
ing inference time.
In terms of data, we employ matched datasets similar to
those utilized in previous studies, ensuring consistency and
comparability. Our datasets encompass a range of tasks,
including natural language inference (NLI) and paraphrase
identification. Datasets are sourced from widely available
repositories such as Hugging Face.
By leveraging these
datasets, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of context
distillation on a diverse set of tasks and domains.
We examine how context distillation mitigates limita-
tions in traditional fine-tuning by comparing our results to
previous studies. We provide insights into the comparative
efficacy of context distillation relative to FT on task adap-
tion.
2. Approach
Overall, our approach was to implement context distilla-
tion by adapting methods used in Mosbach et al. [6]. This
includes referencing and modifying their code to adapt it to
our teacher-student training procedure and to retrieve their
datasets for a comparative analysis. Adaption in this con-
text means selectively using their code, changing it to be
more efficient and flexible, and even fixing bugs encoun-
tered in their code. We note that the original code base was
bloated and badly abstracted. By the end of the project,
we completely rewrote sections of their code and used the
original code to selectively validate our code.
A signif-
icant part of validation was confirming we reconstructed
their datasets to guarantee our results were comparable to
theirs. For example, we needed to confirm that they bina-
rized one of the datasets and make sure we replicated it in
our dataset. Python was used to access PyTorch, a deep
learning framework, as well as Hugging Face Transformers
[11] and Datasets [3].
2.1. Datasets
The datasets were consistent with those used by Mos-
bach et al. [6]. Two common natural language processing
tasks were used: natural language inference (NLI) and para-
phrase identification. For the NLI task, MNLI [10] and RTE
[2] where used for our in-domain datasets and the lexical
overlap subset of HANS [4] was used as our out-of-domain
(OOD) dataset.
MNLI is binarized by removing neutral
examples matching the labels in RTE and HANS datasets.
For the paraphrase identification task, QQP [8] was used as
our in-domain dataset and PAW-QQP [13] as our OOD. All
datasets were configured to use yes labels for entailment or
paraphrase and no labels otherwise.
These datasets are used for natural language processing
(NLP) and serve as common benchmarks. They are widely
available through platforms such as Hugging Face. Each in-
domain dataset comes with training and validation subsets.
The training sets where first sampled to create in-context
examples. They are then randomly sampled for our query
examples which are used for inference. Care was taken to
ensure that the in-context and query examples did not over-
lap.
Regarding data preparation, both the context distillation
teacher and student models are structurally the same, de-
coder only transformers, and so the expected inputs are to-
kenized strings. The output, after applying softmax, is a se-
ries of tokens that after using a model-specific tokenizer for
decoding results in a string representation. Additionally, no
pre- or post-processing was required since the datasets are
used as NLP benchmarks.
2.2. Models
All experiments were run using 4 OPT models [12] - 125
million, 350 million, 1.3 billion, and 2.7 billion parameters.
Using the OPT family of models guarantees that the models
where trained on the same dataset. This isolates the im-
pact of model size from a possible confounding factor of
the training datasets used.
2.3. Context Distillation Setup
The context distillation was set-up using both a teacher
and a student model tasked to infer a label for an inference
request. The teacher model receives a string of in-context
examples followed by an inference request without a label.
The student model receives only the inference request. Both
models generate an answer and the difference between the
two answers, via KL-divergence loss, is used to update the
student model weights.
The teacher model weights stay
frozen.
To generate training contexts for the teacher model, we
randomly sampled the in-domain training set, varying the
number of context examples n ∈{2, 16, 32} . This process
is repeated four times for each n, resulting in four unique
context example sets per n. However, for the RTE task, n =
32 consistently exceeded the context window, so we could
not run it. All in-context examples and inference requests
were formatted according to the pattern in Table 1.
During training, each set of context examples served as
the training context for a single run per model. During that
run, we fine-tuned the student model on 32 inference re-
quests, which were randomly sampled from the in-domain
training set. To prevent data leakage, none of the 32 infer-
ence requests overlapped with the teacher’s context exam-
ples.
2.4. Fine-tuning
The same fine-tuning process was used for all models
and tasks. Each context distillation run used an in-domain
dataset for training and was validated using both the in-
domain and OOD datasets for that task. The last token of


Type
Dataset(s)
Pattern text
Answer prefix
Target tokens
General pattern
All
Premise: {premise} \n Hypothesis: {hypothesis}
\n
Label: {label}
Yes, No
Teacher pattern
MNLI,
RTE
Think logically.
Are the following sentences
examples of entailment, yes or no?\n {context
example n1}\n\n {context example n2}\n\n
...{context example nn}\n\n {inference exam-
ple}
Label:
Yes, No
Teacher pattern
QQP
Think logically.
Are the following sentences
duplicates or paraphrases of each other, yes
or no?\n {context example n1}\n\n {context
example n2}\n\n ...{context example nn}\n\n
{inference example}
Label:
Yes, No
Student pattern
MNLI,
RTE
Are the following sentences examples of entail-
ment, yes or no?\n {inference example}
Label:
Yes, No
Student pattern
QQP
Are the following sentences duplicates or para-
phrases of each other, yes or no?\n {inference ex-
ample}
Label:
Yes, No
Table 1. Patterns used for context distillation. All context examples and inference examples are formatted using the general pattern. Context
examples include the answer after the answer prefix. The inference examples do not.
the teacher and student model outputs were assumed to rep-
resent the label. KL divergence between the teacher and
student output was used to update the student LoRa layers’
weights.
Since both the teacher and student model are the same
size model, LoRa adaptors where utilized. The implemen-
tation of the low-rank adaptors require that the pre-trained
model parameters are frozen, creating a reference model.
A low-rank adaptation matrix layer is then applied on top
of the reference model. During fine-tuning, the adaptation
matrix, as represented by a pair of rank decomposition ma-
trices, is updated. This drastically reduces the number of
updated parameters for each training step. The frozen ref-
erence model was used as our teacher model.
To make our results comparable to Mosbach et al. we
used their hyperparameters [6].
These parameters were
specifically recommended by Mosbach et al. [5] and are
referenced in this Table 2
2.5. Evaluation
For validation, we randomly sampled 100 examples from
both the in-domain validation and OOD validation datasets.
A model was then evaluated on the both the in-domain
validation set followed by the OOD validation dataset that
matched the in-domain dataset’s task.
After completing all of the Context Distillation experi-
ments - each model size, trained on each in-domain dataset,
is validated using the student model on both correspond-
ing in-domain and OOD datasets. The in-domain validation
and OOD results are compared to Mosbach et al. [6] to as-
sess the efficacy of our approach. Snell et al. [9] shows
that Context Distillation out performs direct gradient de-
scent learning on the T5 model [7]. Therefore, we felt that
our approach should reasonably improve on the ICL results.
A direct comparison of in-context learning vs context
distillation across our 4 model sizes has not been performed
previously. We focused on filling this knowledge gap by
conducting experiments that compare CD to ICL results.
3. Experiments
As outlined in the approach section, we conducted a
series of teacher-student context distillation experiments.
Paraphrasing what was presented, we evaluate CD by train-
ing on three benchmark datasets - MNLI and RTE for
the NLI task and QQP for the paraphrase task. For each
dataset we construct teacher contexts of three sizes, n ∈
{2, 16, 32}. For each context size we sample 4 unique in-
context example sets. Each of these example sets equates
to a CD training run. We then trained OPT models of 4
different sizes on each training run by sampling 32 training
examples and stripping to the label to use as an inference
point.
We measure success by comparing the performance of
student models (trained with CD) to teacher models (un-
trained) and previously established methods (ICL and FT)
on held-out validation datasets both in-domain and out-of-
domain.


Hyperparameter
Value
Optimizer
AdamW
Learning rate
10−5
Learning rate schedule
linear warmup then constant
Warmup ratio
10% of total steps
Weight decay
0.0
Dropout
0.1
Batch size
32
Epochs
20
Total steps
#samples
batchsize ∗epochs
Table 2. Hyperparameters used in training
4. Results
4.1. Context Distillation
Our context distillation experiments reveal several no-
table findings. The average accuracy of all four runs for
each dataset and model are presented in Table 3. Figures
presenting the results of all runs for all teacher context
lengths can be found in the appendix.
In terms of success, context distillation proved useful.
From Table 3, one can see that for all scenarios the stu-
dent model achieved comparable in-domain and OOD ac-
curacy to the teacher’s in-domain accuracy. For the MNLI
and RTE datasets the student model only had a slight reduc-
tion in OOD accuracy compared to its in-domain accuracy.
However, QQP presents a peculiar behavior by performing
better on OOD data than in-domain. The small parameter
models, 125m and 350m, performed better after CD on in-
domain validation. This shows the benefit of the student
model seeing more examples through context distillation
than the teacher. The teacher having seen only the 16 in
context examples, while the student benefits from those and
the 32 inference examples used to update the LoRa weights
during tuning. For the larger models, 1.3b and 2.7b, the
teacher performed better than the student, likely a result of
the knowledge ingrained with more parameters.
Interestingly, context distillation seems to alleviate the
impact of model size on the capability of the model. Where
the teacher accuracy increased with model size the student
accuracy was more stable across the sizes. The indicates CD
may be a valuable in enabling smaller models to perform as
well as larger models on specific task.
Finally, CD did not overfit on the training data. As ev-
idenced by the good performance of the context distilled
student model on OOD validation set. Using LoRa layers
with a frozen reference model helped to prevent overfitting
and catastrophic forgetting as well.
4.2. Comparison of Task Tuning Methods
In comparing the different task tuning methods, our find-
ings suggest that CD offers notable quality advantages over
ICL. The results in Figure 1 show our experimental out-
comes in comparison to Mosbach et al. [6] for the n = 16
context examples training runs. CD shows comparable in-
domain performance, but clearly improves on the OOD per-
formance across datasets and model sizes.
On the other hand, CD does not perform as well as FT.
However, with CD the training dataset size and computa-
tion required to compute are drastically reduced. Of note,
the improvement achieved through FT is less drastic on the
million parameter models that on the billion plus parameter
models.
5. Experience
During our research, we anticipated writing code and un-
covering bugs we generated. We did not anticipate how
much code we would write and refactor. The infrastruc-
ture was not trivial to set-up and involved running 8+ in-
stances on Google Colab in parallel with T4, L4 and A100
GPUs (2+ students simultaneously). We spent a significant
amount of time reverse-engineering the code from Mosbach
et al [6]. We wanted to be through and have comparable re-
sults relative to our benchmark. This meant replicating any
transformation to their dataset. For example, the benchmark
binarized the MNLI dataset. Understanding their experi-
ment set-up felt like trial and error, we spent time in several
group calls discussing the finer details of how they set-up
context examples and inference requests. This resulted in
us re-writing our entire code base at least twice. In each
rewrite, we had to fix bugs including ones that we found
in the benchmark code base itself. When writing training
code our team spent considerable time understanding the to-
kenizer and trying to retrieve labels. We ended up confirm-
ing that the benchmark didn’t use labels provided within the
dataset and had to recast them to: yes and no labels.
During training, we reduced the benchmark hyper-


Dataset
Model size
Accuracy teacher
Accuracy in-domain
Accuracy OOD
MNLI
125m
0.547
0.583
0.523
350m
0.531
0.595
0.548
1.3b
0.609
0.525
0.525
2.7b
0.664
0.593
0.515
RTE
125m
0.438
0.530
0.518
350m
0.508
0.538
0.508
1.3b
0.516
0.480
0.533
2.7b
0.547
0.498
0.473
QQP
125m
0.625
0.615
0.710
350m
0.406
0.420
0.490
1.3b
0.406
0.430
0.415
2.7b
0.438
0.428
0.433
Table 3. Comparison of accuracy for the teacher model on in-domain data and post-tuning student model on in-domain and OOD data.
Results represent the scenario using n = 16 context examples. Best result per model size in bold.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1. Sub-figure (a) comprises the results of ICL as published by Mosbach et al. [6]. Sub-figure (b) are the results of CD from our
experiments. Both figures represent the scenario using n = 16 context examples.
parameters, because we had significantly less GPU compute
and memory available to us. Our reduced hyper-parameters
diminished GPU compute needed to 5% of the benchmark.
This reduced training time from multiple days to 4-5 daily
sessions over the weekend.
While running models, one
teammate modified our DL model with LoRa adapter sig-
nificantly cutting both compute and memory requirements.
Even after these changes, the OPT 2.7b model struggled to
complete a run on the A100 often running out of memory.
For the 32 context RTE model, the context was too large
and so it didn’t run. We had to cut it from our experiments.
After generating the results for all 128 runs, we aggregated
the results from JSON into CSV file. One of our teammates
then thoroughly analyzed the results to generate the figures
and charts presented in this paper. Overall, the team put in
a valiant effort and overcame many hurdles to create this
paper and we are happy with the result.


6. Conclusion
Models trained with context distillation internalize con-
text examples allowing them to be used during inference.
This greatly increases examples that a model learns from
avoiding the context window limit. In our paper, context
distillation performed well on the out-of-domain dataset
and had comparable results to in-context learning on the
in-domain dataset. Our study did not tease out the influ-
ence of model size on performance. We believe this is due
to our limited sample size: 4 runs per model per dataset
per context length. We plan on rectifying this with future
runs, but note that our initial 120 runs required significant
compute. This compute includes upwards of 2 A100s and a
minimum of 4 GPUs run in parallel over multiple days. The
computational requirement was noticeable for the OPT 2.7b
model, which caused the 40 GB memory A100 GPU on
multiple occasions to run out of memory for both the MNLI
and RTE datasets. Overall, the results were promising with
CD showing advanced performance over ICL especially for
out-of-domain generalization.
Context distillation is a state-of-the-art training regime
and is used in multiple domains. We thought about using
context distillation for LLM code generation and internal-
izing code repositories. We are considering a future abla-
tion study where we investigate performance of an amal-
gamated model: LoRa, knowledge distillation, and context
distillation and then selectively remove components to mea-
sure their impact on performance. As for our current re-
search presented in this paper, we would like to run the
models to generate more samples so that we can properly
tease out the effect of model size on performance. An al-
ternative approach is using 128 inference requests instead
of 32 during training. During hyper-parameter tuning, this
change looked promising as several large models had over
70% accuracy for a few tasks. We chose 32 inference re-
quests due to computational constraints. Snell et al. [9] per-
forms context distillation with a scratchpad and we would
love to replicate that work. We also wanted to conduct an
experiment by providing the student model with a small
in-context dataset to measure its performance and we also
thought about using context distillation on instruction-fine-
tuned models.


References
[1] Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain,
Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, Andy Jones, Nicholas Joseph,
Benjamin Mann, Nova DasSarma, Nelson Elhage, Zac
Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Jackson Kernion, Kamal
Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom B. Brown,
Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared Kaplan.
A general language assistant as a laboratory for alignment.
ArXiv, abs/2112.00861, 2021. 1
[2] Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
The
pascal recognising textual entailment challenge. In Joaquin
Qui˜nonero-Candela, Ido Dagan, Bernardo Magnini, and Flo-
rence d’Alch´e Buc, editors, Machine Learning Challenges.
Evaluating Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classifica-
tion, and Recognising Tectual Entailment, pages 177–190,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 2
[3] Quentin Lhoest, Albert Villanova del Moral, Yacine Jer-
nite, Abhishek Thakur, Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil,
Julien Chaumond, Mariama Drame, Julien Plu, Lewis
Tunstall, Joe Davison, Mario ˇSaˇsko, Gunjan Chhablani,
Bhavitvya Malik, Simon Brandeis, Teven Le Scao, Vic-
tor Sanh, Canwen Xu, Nicolas Patry, Angelina McMillan-
Major, Philipp Schmid, Sylvain Gugger, Cl´ement Delangue,
Th´eo Matussi`ere, Lysandre Debut, Stas Bekman, Pierric Cis-
tac, Thibault Goehringer, Victor Mustar, Franc¸ois Lagunas,
Alexander Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Datasets: A community
library for natural language processing. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: System Demonstrations, pages 175–184,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, Nov. 2021.
Association for Computational Linguistics. 2
[4] Tom McCoy, Ellie Pavlick, and Tal Linzen. Right for the
wrong reasons: Diagnosing syntactic heuristics in natural
language inference. In Anna Korhonen, David Traum, and
Llu´ıs M`arquez, editors, Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 3428–3448, Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for
Computational Linguistics. 2
[5] Marius Mosbach, Maksym Andriushchenko, and Dietrich
Klakow.
On the stability of fine-tuning bert: Misconcep-
tions, explanations, and strong baselines. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 3
[6] Marius Mosbach, Tiago Pimentel, Shauli Ravfogel, Diet-
rich Klakow, and Yanai Elazar. Few-shot fine-tuning vs. in-
context learning: A fair comparison and evaluation. ArXiv,
abs/2305.16938, 2023. Github repo: https://github.com/uds-
lsv/llmft. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16938. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
[7] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with
a unified text-to-text transformer.
ArXiv, abs/1910.10683,
2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10683. 3
[8] Lakshay Sharma, Laura Graesser, Nikita Nangia, and Utku
Evci.
Natural language understanding with the quora
question pairs dataset.
ArXiv, abs/1907.01041, 2019.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.01041. 2
[9] Charlie Snell, Dan Klein, and Ruiqi Zhong.
Learn-
ing by distilling context.
ArXiv, abs/2209.15189, 2022.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.15189. 1, 3, 6
[10] Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman. A
broad-coverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding
through inference. In Marilyn Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda
Stent, editors, Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers), pages 1112–1122, New Orleans, Louisiana,
June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. 2
[11] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chau-
mond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim
Rault, R´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam
Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien
Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama
Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush.
Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
pages 38–45, Online, Oct. 2020. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. 2
[12] Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe,
Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab,
Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam
Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura,
Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Opt:
Open pre-trained transformer language models.
ArXiv,
abs/2205.01068, 2022. https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.01068. 2
[13] Yuan Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Luheng He. PAWS: Para-
phrase adversaries from word scrambling. In Jill Burstein,
Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio, editors, Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers),
pages 1298–1308, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. 2


A. Context distillation experiments
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2. Exploring the effect of CD on model quality. Shown are the accuracy of the context distilled student model.
