arXiv:2505.07411v2  [cs.LG]  15 Jun 2025
ICE-Pruning: An Iterative Cost-Efficient Pruning
Pipeline for Deep Neural Networks
Wenhao Hu, Paul Henderson, Jos´e Cano
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Scotland, UK
Abstract—Pruning is a widely used method for compressing
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), where less relevant parameters
are removed from a DNN model to reduce its size. However,
removing parameters reduces model accuracy, so pruning is
typically combined with fine-tuning, and sometimes other op-
erations such as rewinding weights, to recover accuracy. A
common approach is to repeatedly prune and then fine-tune,
with increasing amounts of model parameters being removed in
each step. While straightforward to implement, pruning pipelines
that follow this approach are computationally expensive due to
the need for repeated fine-tuning.
In this paper we propose ICE-Pruning, an iterative pruning
pipeline for DNNs that significantly decreases the time required
for pruning by reducing the overall cost of fine-tuning, while
maintaining a similar accuracy to existing pruning pipelines.
ICE-Pruning is based on three main components: i) an automatic
mechanism to determine after which pruning steps fine-tuning
should be performed; ii) a freezing strategy for faster fine-tuning
in each pruning step; and iii) a custom pruning-aware learning
rate scheduler to further improve the accuracy of each pruning
step and reduce the overall time consumption. We also propose an
efficient auto-tuning stage for the hyperparameters (e.g., freezing
percentage) introduced by the three components. We evaluate
ICE-Pruning on several DNN models and datasets, showing that
it can accelerate pruning by up to 9.61×. Code is available at
https://github.com/gicLAB/ICE-Pruning
Index Terms—Artificial Intelligence, Deep Neural Networks,
Pruning, Hyperparameter Search.
I. INTRODUCTION
Pruning is a widely used method for compressing Deep
Neural Network (DNN) models, reducing their size and mak-
ing them more suitable for deployment in resource-constrained
edge devices such as mobile phones, drones, etc [1], [2]. It
typically involves removing less important parameters from a
pre-trained DNN model, followed by fine-tuning the remaining
parameters on the training dataset to compensate for any
potential loss in accuracy [3]–[5]. The pruning process of a
DNN is often formulated as a pruning-fine-tuning pipeline,
where inputs are a pre-trained DNN model, a dataset, and a
pruning ratio; and the output is a pruned model that ideally
achieves similar accuracy to the original model.
One popular design for the pruning-fine-tuning pipeline is
iterative pruning-fine-tuning. Here the DNN model is repeat-
edly pruned, with fine-tuning performed after each pruning
step; this process continues until a target compression ratio
is reached [3], [4], [6]. However, the repeated fine-tuning
operations in such pipelines are prohibitively time-consuming
when the dataset and/or DNN model are large. More sophis-
ticated methods adapt this basic pipeline in different ways.
For example, AAP [7] sometimes rewinds the weights of
the pruned model to an earlier state and resumes pruning
from there. Unfortunately, this further increases the time
consumption of the pruning process.
To address the slowness of existing iterative pruning
pipelines, we propose ICE-Pruning, a novel and automatically
configured Iterative Cost-Efficient pruning pipeline that sig-
nificantly reduces the pruning time while providing similar
accuracy to existing pipelines, especially for high-redundancy
DNN models. ICE-Pruning is based on the idea that, due to
the high parameter redundancy present in most DNN models,
not all the pruning steps need to be followed by fine-tuning
to recover accuracy, so that fine-tuning can be completely
avoided for some pruning steps.
To implement this idea, ICE-Pruning makes three key
changes to the standard pruning-fine-tuning pipeline. First,
instead of fine-tuning the full DNN model after every pruning
step, ICE-Pruning measures the accuracy drop immediately
after a pruning step; it then skips fine-tuning if the accuracy
drop is less than a certain threshold. Second, we introduce a
novel layer freezing strategy to reduce fine-tuning overheads in
each pruning step; this automatically determines which layers
have minimal effect during fine-tuning, and can therefore
keep their retained weights fixed during fine-tuning. Third,
we introduce a custom pruning-aware learning rate scheduler
that dynamically adjusts the learning rate based on the current
pruning level; this improves the accuracy after each fine-
tuning stage and thus reduces the number of times fine-
tuning is triggered overall. Since these three changes introduce
new hyperparameters, we also design an efficient auto-tuning
stage with a custom objective function that simultaneously
minimizes the accuracy loss and the time consumption, thus
avoiding the need for manual tuning.
Note that ICE-Pruning does not introduce any new pruning
criteria. Instead, it supports widely-used existing criteria (e.g.,
L1 norm [6], random, entropy-based [4] and mean activa-
tion [8] filter pruning), thus providing a plug-and-play solution
to improve pruning time on existing pipelines.
The contributions of the paper include the following:
• ICE-Pruning, a novel pipeline for accelerating DNN
pruning that is based on three key components: i) a mech-
anism to determine when fine-tuning should be performed
based on an accuracy drop threshold; ii) a novel layer
freezing strategy to reduce fine-tuning overheads in each
pruning step; iii) a pruning-aware learning rate scheduler


to further improve the accuracy of each pruning step and
reduce the possibility of triggering fine-tuning.
• An efficient auto-tuning stage to avoid the need to man-
ually tune pruning hyperparameters.
• An evaluation of ICE-Pruning with different pruning
criteria, demonstrating that it works with all of them and
also identifying the criterion that yields the best results.
• An ablation study to show how the different components
of the ICE-Pruning pipeline impact both accuracy and
overall pruning time.
• A comparison of ICE-Pruning against i) a baseline iter-
ative pruning pipeline and ii) the state-of-the-art method
AAP, using three different combinations of DNN model
and dataset. Overall our results demonstrate that ICE-
Pruning can accelerate pruning by up to 9.61× while
maintaining similar (and sometimes better) final accuracy
than existing solutions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
we provide the required background and discuss related works;
Section III shows the detailed design of ICE-Pruning; in
Section IV, we evaluate ICE-Pruning and provide an ablation
study of its components and a comparison with the state-
of-the-art; finally, Section V provides some conclusions and
briefly discusses potential future work.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Deep Neural Network pruning
DNN pruning methods can be characterized with four key
dimensions [9]: Structure, Scoring, Scheduling, and Fine-
tuning.
• Structure refers to the level of granularity of pruning,
and is generally divided into two classes: unstructured
and structured. In unstructured pruning individual weights
are removed, whereas structured pruning removes groups
of parameters such as whole filters/channels or atten-
tion heads. With the increasing attention on pruning re-
search [10], several approaches have been developed [9],
[11]. Our ICE-Pruning pipeline focuses on structured
pruning.
• Scoring refers to which parameters to prune. For example,
a popular approach is to use the L1 norm [6], where
we prune parameters with absolute values closer to zero.
The L2 norm is an alternative solution to determine
which structures should be pruned [12]. The similarity
of the structures within the same layers can also be used
to make the pruning decisions [13]. For Transformers,
previous research [14] shows that attention heads can also
be pruned guided by the Taylor Expansion [15] of the
difference between before and after pruning the heads.
ICE-Pruning supports various scoring approaches such as
L1 norm.
• Scheduling refers to how much we prune in each step. For
example, we might perform all the pruning in a single
step, one-shot pruning [6]; or gradually increase the
amount of pruning in iterative steps, iterative pruning [3].
ICE-Pruning is based on the iterative pruning.
• Finally, fine-tuning refers to how we recover lost accuracy
by training the model for a small number of epochs. The
typical method is to use the training dataset to do the
training [3], and ICE-Pruning does this.
B. Fine-tuning
As compared to one-shot pruning, iterative pruning can
yield better accuracy if we fine-tune after every pruning
step [6]. However, the larger the DNN model is, the more
expensive fine-tuning becomes. Therefore, many methods only
fine-tune for 1 or 2 epochs with some accuracy penalty,
sometimes training more epochs for the final pruning step [3]–
[5]. Note that even with a low number of epochs, the fine-
tuning process can still be prohibitively time-consuming due
to the large dataset sizes, the model sizes or the limited
computing capacity available.
To avoid the high cost of fine-tuning, ICE-Pick [16] tries
to reduce the overall time consumption while other solutions
entirely eliminate fine-tuning from the pruning process. For
example, NFP [17] compensates the pruned layers with their
Batch Normalization beta factors instead of fine-tuning the
model. Roy et al. [18] proposes moving pruning to training
to avoid fine-tuning during pruning. However, such solutions
require specialized training operations (e.g., NFP uses a cus-
tomized loss function), which has limited applicability to prac-
tical DNN model deployment where users already have a pre-
trained model (common in modern artificial intelligence tasks
such as natural language processing and computer vision).
It is important to note that fine-tuning is not exclusive
to pruning. In transfer learning [19], fine-tuning is used
to adapt models to domains with limited data. Similar to
pruning, fine-tuning in transfer learning can also be very time-
consuming [20]. To address this problem, some methods use
layer freezing to accelerate the fine-tuning process [19]–[22],
where the parameters of some layers of the model are ‘frozen’
such that they cannot be changed during fine-tuning. We also
apply this idea to model pruning, due to the similar role of fine-
tuning in both tasks. Note also that in both tasks, fine-tuning
tries to adapt the models into new states; for transfer learning,
fine-tuning adapts the models to new datasets; for pruning,
fine-tuning adapts the models to new sparsity structures.
C. Automatic pruning pipeline
Some pruning pipelines such as AAP [7] aim to automati-
cally prune DNN models [7], but do not focus on efficiency.
AAP is based on LTH [23], which shows a model that includes
sub-models that are easier to train. As a result, AAP tries to
find the best state (the ideal sub-model for training) of the
DNN models to prune and fine-tune. To do that, AAP rewinds
the weights of the pruned model to previous states if the
current state cannot satisfy, for example, the target accuracy.
This makes the running time even longer. Also, for models that
have high parameter redundancies, rewinding to the previous
state is not necessarily better than direct fine-tuning on the
current state, as the high number of remaining parameters can
still have enough expressivity [24].


(a) Overview
(b) Fine-Tuning Cases
Fig. 1: ICE-Pruning pipeline: (a) Using subsampled datasets, we automatically search for the best hyperparameters by running
the whole pruning pipeline with the current hyperparameters (Stage 1). Then, we re-run the pruning pipeline with the full
dataset and the best hyperparameters found (Stage 2). In each step, we prune the model (note that the dotted lines are the edges
of the pruned parts) and then we move to the next pruning step or fine-tune the model by applying the freezing strategy; (b)
Fine-tuning has four cases depending on the accuracy loss and pruned model width. The learning rate is adjusted dynamically,
and fine-tuning for a given step is halted if the accuracy loss is lower than the threshold.
III. ICE-PRUNING
A. Overview
The main idea behind ICE-Pruning is that instead of fine-
tuning a full DNN model in every pruning step, we freeze less
sensitive layers and skip fine-tuning when the accuracy loss is
lower than a user-defined threshold. Figure 1 gives an overview
of our ICE-Pruning pipeline, with Algorithm 1 describing the
steps in more detail.
As we can see in Figure 1a, ICE-Pruning has two main
stages. In Stage 1, we automatically search for the best
hyperparameters using subsampled datasets. Using the current
candidate hyperparameters, we iteratively prune the DNN
model. After applying each pruning step, we move to the next
pruning step or fine-tune the non-frozen layers of the model
by applying the freezing strategy. If fine-tuning happens, we
adjust the learning rate dynamically. In Stage 2, we redo the
iterative pruning of the previous stage but using the full dataset
and applying the best hyperparameters found. During both
stages of fine-tuning (Figure 1b), cases 1 , 2 , and 3 show
how we gradually reduce the learning rate as the level of
pruning increases. In case 4 we stop fine-tuning when the
accuracy loss is below a threshold.
In Algorithm 1, Stage 1 (lines 4-12) iterates the candi-
date hyperparameters and selects the ones that minimize the
errors (line 9), which involves both accuracy loss and time
consumption during the pruning-fine-tuning (PFT) operations.
This process (lines 6-12) corresponds to Equation 2. Then in
Stage 2 (line 14), the pruning-fine-tuning is applied again but
with the best hyperparameters found. Note that PFT is defined
in Algorithm 2, where the model is first frozen (line 5) by our
novel freezing strategy (discussed in Section III-B). Then, for
each pruning step, the algorithm measures the accuracy drop
value (line 8). If the value is larger or equal than the pre-
defined threshold (line 8), it fine-tunes the model by adjusting
the learning rate (lines 9-11). The details of lines 6-11 will be
discussed in Section III-C. The following subsections discuss
the key design aspects of the algorithm and further motivate
our design choices.
B. Layer Freezing
We adopt layer freezing, a class of techniques commonly
used in transfer learning [19]–[21]. This is motivated by the
fact that some DNN layers (typically initial layers in the
model) see smaller weight shifts than others during fine-tuning,
and the ranks of the weight shifts are generally maintained
(we provide evidence of this in Section IV-B). Therefore, we
can skip training these layers and reduce the fine-tuning time.
Also, since the ranks of the shifts are generally maintained,
we can get information of which layers are less sensitive to
pruning from a single pruning step. Based on those insights,
we design the following freezing strategy: We run a pruning
step followed by fine-tuning while tracking the weight changes
of different layers. After fine-tuning, and based on the input


Algorithm 1 ICE-Pruning Pipeline
1: Input:
(1) Pruning-Fine-Tuning operator PFT(...),
(2) Pruning steps σ,
(3) Model M,
(4) Hyperparameters Search Space Λ,
(5) Accuracy testing operator Test(., .),
(6) DataSet D,
(7) DataSet sampler Sp(.),
(8) Layer-wise Pruning operator P(.),
2: Output: Pruned Model M∗
3: Stage 1: Auto-Tuning the Hyperparameters
4: accorig ←Test(M, Sp(D))
5: ebest ←MAX VALUE
6: for λ ∈Λ do
7:
time, acc ←PFT(σ, M, λ, Sp(D), P)
8:
∆A ←accorig −acc
▷eq. 3
9:
e ←
time+∆A
max(time,∆A)
10:
if e < ebest then
11:
λbest ←λ
12:
ebest ←e
13: Stage 2: Apply the Searched Hyperparameters
14: M∗←PFT(σ, M, λbest, D, P);
15: return M∗
freezing percentage (i.e., the proportion of frozen layers), the
layers with smaller weight changes are frozen. To eliminate
the impact of weight magnitudes and have fair comparisons,
weight changes of each layer are normalized by the norm of
the layer weights. This is a novel freezing strategy in our work,
and we conduct an ablation study to show the effectiveness
of this component in Section IV-D. In Figure 1, we use a
snowflake to represent the layer freezing.
C. Pruning and Fine-tuning
The main goal of ICE-Pruning is to iteratively prune DNN
models but to trigger fine-tuning as few times as possible, thus
reducing the overall pruning time. Lines 7-11 of Algorithm 2
show a pruning and fine-tuning step. For each layer in the
model, including the frozen ones, we apply structured pruning
and then we evaluate the model on the test dataset. If we
observe an accuracy drop higher than or equal to our threshold
(line 8 of Algorithm 2), then we trigger fine-tuning; otherwise,
we skip it. This accuracy threshold is searched automatically or
set manually, with its value varying depending on the learning
task and the application’s tolerance to accuracy loss.
Note that, since our method acts as a meta-algorithm that
wraps existing pruning criteria, we do not design a new
pruning criterion. However, to select the pruning criterion that
works best with ICE-Pruning, we compare four popular criteria
in Section IV-C.
If we trigger fine-tuning, we want to minimize the training
time while converging to a higher accuracy more quickly.
Dynamic learning rates are widely used to adapt to changing
learning conditions [25], [26]. It has been shown that narrower
Algorithm 2 Pruning-Fine-Tuning Operator (PFT)
1: Input:
(1) Layer-wise Pruning operator P(.),
(2) Pruning steps σ,
(3) Freezing operator Freeze(.),
(4) Accuracy testing operator Test(., .),
(5) Parameter calculating operator Pr(.),
(6) Fine-tuning operator FT(., .),
(7) Model M,
(8) Dataset D,
(9) Original accuracy accorig,
(10) Searched Hyperparameters λ
(10.1) Accuracy drop threshold θ,
(10.2) Frozen layers percentage η,
(10.3) Initial learning rate (LR) LRbase,
(10.4) Maximum LR change ∆,
(10.5) Pruning level p that ∆midpoint is reached,
(10.6) The shape control β
2: Output: Pruned Model M∗
3: Morig ←M
4: accorig ←Test(M, D)
5: Mfrozen ←Freeze(M, η)
6: for step ∈{1 . . . σ} do
7:
Mfrozen ←P(Mfrozen, step)
8:
if accorig −Test(Mfrozen, D) ⩾θ then
9:
α ←Pr(Mfrozen)
Pr(Morig)
10:
LRmax ←LRbase −
∆
1+(
α
2×(1−p)−α))
β
▷eq. 1
11:
FT(Mfrozen, LRmax, D)
12: M∗←Mfrozen
13: return M∗
models (i.e., smaller average width, where we define ‘width’
as the number of non-pruned structures in a given layer) have a
narrower loss landscape [27], and thus can benefit from lower
maximum learning rates. When we prune, we similarly shrink
the loss landscape. That means that we benefit from controlling
the upper bound of whatever learning rate scheduler is being
used for fine-tuning, to match the current loss landscape.
Therefore, inspired by S-Cyc [28], we design a pruning-aware
scheduler to choose the maximum learning rate, based on the
current level of pruning, measured according to the average
width. Our maximum learning rate is defined by:
LRmax = LRbase −
∆
1 +

α
2×(1−p)−α)
β
(1)
where LRmax is the upper bound of the existing scheduler
used for fine-tuning (e.g., cosine decay or constant), and α is
the proportion of unpruned parameters. The hyperparameters
are: LRbase, the maximum learning rate to be used for the
unpruned model; ∆, the maximum change in the learning rate
during pruning, with range (0, LRbase); p, the level of pruning
where the midpoint of ∆is reached, with range (0, 50%]; and
β, which controls the shape of the curve, with range (0, +∞).


By tuning these hyperparameters, we can flexibly formulate
different types of decreasing learning schedules for different
situations. We conduct an ablation study to show the impact
of this component in Section IV-D.
D. Automatic Selection of hyperparameters
The behavior of ICE-Pruning is determined by several
hyperparameters. To avoid the need for manually tuning these
hyperparameters, we add an auto-tuning stage. We empirically
design the following optimization cost function:
λ = arg min
λ
PT + ∆A
max(PT, ∆A)
(2)
where
∆A = Accoriginal −Accpruned
(3)
and λ is the set of hyperparameters; PT is the pruning time,
which is the overall time (in seconds) required by the whole
pruning-fine-tuning from the first layer to the last; Accoriginal
is the accuracy of the full model; and Accpruned is the final
accuracy of the pruned model. We normalize the sum of PT
and ∆A by the larger value of them to avoid the domination of
larger values. Empirically, since accuracy PT is always larger
than ∆A, minimizing this function is equivalent to minimizing
the accuracy loss per time-unit (e.g., seconds) during pruning.
We use a search algorithm to find the optimal λ instead of
gradient-based methods. In this way, the pruning time does
not need to be differentiable, which is required by gradient-
based methods.
We compared several popular hyperparameter search al-
gorithms (i.e., Grid Search, Tree-structured Parzen Estima-
tor [29], Random Sampling, Gaussian process-based Bayesian
Optimization [30]) and found that grid search performs best,
since our search space is low-dimensional. To save time in
the auto-tuning stage, we only use a randomly sampled subset
of the data. The sampled data has a similar distribution as
the whole dataset, thus if the hyperparameters optimize the
objective (2) with respect to the sampled dataset, they should
also optimize it with respect to the full dataset, assuming the
same DNN models and pruning methods. As a result, the
optimal hyperparameters can be transferred to the later stage.
Our experimental results in SectionIV show that this design
works.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we validate ICE-Pruning and demonstrate its
ability to reduce the overall pruning time while maintaining
accuracy. First, we show how some DNN layers change much
less than others during fine-tuning, justifying the use of layer
freezing (Section IV-B). We then compare ICE-Pruning when
using four different pruning criteria (L1 norm filter pruning,
Random filter pruning, Entropy-based filter pruning and Mean
activation filter pruning) and justify which one works best with
ICE-Pruning (Section IV-C). After that, we conduct an ablation
study to explore the impact of different components such as
the accuracy drop threshold mechanism, layer freezing, and the
pruning-aware learning rate scheduler (Section IV-D). Finally,
TABLE I: Fine-tuning details for different model and dataset.
BS is batch size, LR is base learning rate, MO is Momentum,
WD is weight decay. Note that the TinyImageNet experiments
use batch size 256 for AAP and 128 for the rest pipelines.
Model
Dataset
BS
LR
MO
WD
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
128
0.001
0.9
0.0001
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
128/256
0.001
0.9
0.0001
WRN-101
ImageNet
256
0.001
0.9
0.0001
we compare ICE-Pruning with a baseline iterative pruning
pipeline and the state-of-the-art pipeline AAP [7] for different
datasets and DNN models (Section IV-E).
A. Experimental setup
We conduct experiments with the following datasets: i)
CIFAR-10 [31] (using the full dataset when doing the fine-
tuning, except for the hyperparameter search phase) and ii)
TinyImageNet [32] and ImageNet [33] (using subsampled
datasets when performing the fine-tuning). Note that for all the
experiments we adopt the common practice of performing only
one fine-tuning epoch in each pruning step [3]–[5], except the
non-AAP experiments for TinyImageNet, in which after fine-
tuning in the last pruning step, we applied four more epochs
with full datasets. For CIFAR-10, all pipelines use knowledge
distillation [34], [35], following the practice of Joo et al. [3].
We use L1 norm filter pruning [6] in each non-AAP
experiment (including Section III-B), except Section IV-C
where we compare different heuristics. All the models are
pruned layer by layer with consistent specified pruning ratios
for each layer in each experiment. The pruned layers in our
DNN models are the basic blocks in ResNets [36], the dense
blocks in DenseNet [37], and the bottleneck block in Wide
ResNet (WRN) [38]. For fine-tuning, all experiments use the
SGD [39] optimizer, with batch size of 128 or 256, base
learning rate of 0.001 (except the experiments that need to
search for it), momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 0.0001.
The details of the fine-tuning are shown in Table I.
We use PyTorch [40] as our main machine learning frame-
work, with Optuna [30] for automated hyperparameter search.
The experiments were run on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX
3090 GPU, except for ImageNet which run on two of them.
B. Justification of Layer Freezing
We first study how the L1 norm of model weights changes
during iterative fine-tuning, to justify the novel layer freezing
strategies introduced in Section III-B. Specifically, we consider
ResNet-152 [36] and MobileNetV2 [41] trained on CIFAR-
10 [31]. To eliminate the possibility that larger magnitude
weights may have higher L1 norm changes, we normalize
the results by the L2 norms of initial layer weights. Each
experiment applies a pruning ratio (the proportion of filters
removed) of 30%. Figure 2 shows how the weights of different
layers change as the amount of fine-tuning increases. We
observe that across our DNN models, some layers tend to see
smaller changes in weights during fine-tuning. This implies


(a) ResNet-152
(b) MobileNetV2
Fig. 2: Normalized weight changes (∆W / ∥W0∥2) per layer
for each pruning step in DNN iterative pruning; ∆W is the
weight changes, ∥W0∥2 is the L2 norm of the initial weights.
The learning rate is 0.001 and the pruning ratio is 30%.
that those layers are insensitive to fine-tuning, or at least it
is not worth spending time on them for fine-tuning because
of the small changes. We also observe that the ranks of the
weight changes of the layers are generally maintained, so the
sensitivity ranking of layers can be determined after the very
first pruning step. This is a powerful insight, since determining
which layers are less sensitive based on only one pruning step
is cheap, and hence makes ICE-Pruning faster. In summary,
this experiment justifies both freezing the less sensitive layers
(determined by observing weight changes from one pruning
step) and applying the freezing step only once.
C. Comparisons of different pruning criteria
To know which pruning criterion works best with ICE-
Pruning, we now compare four different pruning criteria:
• L1 norm filter pruning: For each layer, the filters that
have a smaller L1 norm will be pruned.
• Random filter pruning: For each layer, the filters are
randomly pruned.
• Entropy-based filter pruning [4]: For each layer, the
filters that correspond to lower feature map entropy values
are removed.
• Mean activation filter pruning [8]: For each layer,
the filters that correspond to the lowest mean activation
values are removed.
For each pruning criterion, we conducted an experiment
with ResNet-152 on CIFAR-10 and DenseNet-121 [37] on
Fig. 3: Pruning time vs. accuracy of ICE-Pruning with four
different pruning criteria for two different models, Resnet-152
on CIFAR-10, and DenseNet-121 on TinyImageNet.
TinyImageNet [32]. Each experiment applies pruning ratios
of 60%, 70% and 80%.
In Figure 3, we observe that for different DNN models,
datasets and pruning ratios, L1 norm filter pruning provides
the best trade-off between accuracy and time consumption.
As a result, we use L1 norm as the pruning criterion for
ICE-Pruning in the remaining experiments. Interestingly, we
observe that random pruning performs well too. This is
because of the low overhead of using this pruning criterion,
and because the models have enough redundancies for these
datasets. Therefore, we suggest users to use random pruning
as well.
D. Ablation study of key components
We explore the impact of the three key components of ICE-
Pruning (accuracy drop threshold, freezing percentage, and
learning rate scheduler) in order to provide deeper insights
into our method. We select ResNet-152 on CIFAR-10 and
DenseNet-121 on TinyImageNet. For each model, we apply
ICE-Pruning but without one component and compare the
accuracy and time consumption with the full pipeline. The
pruning ratio is 60%.
From Table II, we observe that for both DNN models, using
all ICE-Pruning components provides the best accuracy and
pruning time trade-off. We also observe that the mechanism
based on accuracy drop threshold provides the greatest time
reduction. Specifically, the accuracy drop threshold mechanism
provides up to 56.43% time reduction, layer freezing provides
up to 10.75% time reduction and pruning-aware learning rate
scheduler provides up to 11.68% time reduction.
E. Comparison against existing pruning pipelines
We now compare ICE-Pruning with a baseline and the state-
of-the-art method AAP [7] in terms of final accuracy and time
consumption. The baseline is the naive way of iterative pruning
in which DNN models are pruned component by component,
and at each pruning step an epoch of fine-tuning is applied [3],
[4], [6]. We conduct the experiments with three pruning ratios


TABLE II: Ablation study of ICE-Pruning key components.
Threshold is the accuracy drop threshold mechanism, Freezing
is layer freezing and Scheduler is pruning-aware scheduler.
Time is the time consumption.
(a) Ablation study with Resnet-152 on CIFAR-10
Threshold
Freezing
Scheduler
Accuracy(%)
Time(s)
✓
✓
✓
92.23
1943
✗
✓
✓
92.81
4459
✓
✗
✓
92.30
2177
✓
✓
✗
91.42
2200
(b) Ablation study with DenseNet-121 on TinyImageNet
Threshold
Freezing
Scheduler
Accuracy(%)
Time(s)
✓
✓
✓
62.33
409
✗
✓
✓
62.17
426
✓
✗
✓
58.67
429
✓
✓
✗
61.83
408
(60%, 70% and 80%), with three DNN models (ResNet-152,
DenseNet-121, and Wide ResNet-101-2 [WRN-101-2]) and
three datasets (CIFAR-10, TinyImageNet and ImageNet). Note
that AAP prunes the models globally, which means that it
considers all the model components that are to be pruned
(target components) as an integrated target. Therefore, while
AAP aims to prune the model to a certain level, the pruning
ratio may not be consistent for each target component.
In Table III, we observe that ICE-Pruning has better ac-
curacy and time consumption in most cases. Specifically, at
60% pruning, ICE-Pruning has up to 7.8% higher accuracy
and is up to 2.96× faster; at 70% pruning, ICE-Pruning has
up to 1.35% higher accuracy and is up to 4.12× faster; at 80%
pruning, ICE-Pruning has up to 3.16% higher accuracy and is
up to 9.61× faster. Even in cases where the accuracies are
similar, such as at 80% pruning with ResNet-152 and CIFAR-
10, ICE-Pruning is still up to 2.67× faster. This is because i)
the models are so over-parameterized that they are robust to
pruning and ii) we skip many fine-tuning operations, which
are applied unnecessarily often in other pipelines.
Note that, for ICE-Pruning, the magnitude of time con-
sumption varies significantly between the different models
and datasets. For example, for ResNet-152, DenseNet-121 and
WRN-101-2 with 60% pruning, ICE-Pruning takes 1,943, 409,
and 6,530 seconds respectively. This is due to the different
sizes of models and datasets. Generally, the larger the sizes
are, the slower ICE-Pruning will be.
V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed ICE-Pruning, a simple yet effective
threshold-guided automatic pruning pipeline based on iterative
pruning. ICE-Pruning is based on three key components:
a mechanism to determine when fine-tuning is necessary
based on an accuracy drop threshold, a novel layer freezing
strategy, and a pruning-aware learning rate scheduler. This
design enables ICE-Pruning to be a plug-and-play solution
TABLE III: Comparisons of ICE-Pruning with AAP and
Baseline. Acc is accuracy, Time is time consumption.
(a) 60% pruning accuracy and time consumption
Pipeline
Model
Dataset
Acc(%)
Time(s)
Baseline
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
92.15
3793
AAP
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.91
4909
ICE-Pruning
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
92.23
1943
Baseline
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
59.50
1212
AAP
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
54.53
898
ICE-Pruning
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
62.33
409
Baseline
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
62.77
10105
AAP
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
59.3
6935
ICE-Pruning
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
61.81
6530
(b) 70% pruning accuracy and time consumption
Pipeline
Model
Dataset
Acc(%)
Time(s)
Baseline
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.29
3829
AAP
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.63
5301
ICE-Pruning
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.97
3144
Baseline
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
57.00
1237
AAP
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
53.15
1744
ICE-Pruning
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
54.50
423
Baseline
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
55.65
9764
AAP
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
55.05
15250
ICE-Pruning
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
54.97
7393
(c) 80% pruning accuracy and time consumption
Pipeline
Model
Dataset
Acc(%)
Time(s)
Baseline
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.11
3811
AAP
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.20
8719
ICE-Pruning
ResNet-152
CIFAR-10
91.10
3266
Baseline
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
50.50
1209
AAP
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
49.84
4151
ICE-Pruning
DenseNet-121
TinyImageNet
53.00
432
Baseline
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
45.62
9344
AAP
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
44.01
14979
ICE-Pruning
WRN-101-2
ImageNet
46.85
8897
that supports widely-used pruning criteria. Additionally, ICE-
Pruning automatically determines the best hyperparameters,
which saves the user from the effort of manual tuning. In our
experiments, we show how different pruning criteria work with
ICE-Pruning, and we have explored the impact of different
components. Finally, we show that ICE-Pruning can maintain
accuracy while reducing pruning time significantly, up to
9.61× compared with existing pruning pipelines.
As future work, we plan to use ICE-Pruning with a broader
range of real industrial development environment, models,
datasets, and pruning methods to explore its benefits in real-
world scenarios. For example, we could use ICE-Pruning to
prune large language models (LLMs) [42] for efficient de-
ployment. As another example, we could deploy ICE-Pruning
on different types of machine learning servers with diverse
hardware configurations to evaluate the impact of hardware
platforms on its efficiency.


REFERENCES
[1] L. Deng, G. Li, S. Han, L. Shi, and Y. Xie, “Model compression and
hardware acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 4, pp. 485–532, 2020.
[2] P. Gibson, J. Cano, E. Crowley, A. Storkey, and M. O’boyle, “DLAS: A
Conceptual Model for Across-Stack Deep Learning Acceleration,” ACM
Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization, vol. 22, no. 1, Mar.
2025.
[3] D. Joo, E. Yi, S. Baek, and J. Kim, “Linearly Replaceable Filters for
Deep Network Channel Pruning,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 8021–8029, May 2021.
[4] J.-H. Luo and J. Wu, “An entropy-based pruning method for cnn
compression,” ArXiv, vol. abs/1706.05791, 2017.
[5] J.-H. Luo, J. Wu, and W. Lin, “Thinet: A filter level pruning method
for deep neural network compression,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
international conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 5058–5066.
[6] H. Li, A. Kadav, I. Durdanovic, H. Samet, and H. P. Graf, “Pruning
filters for efficient convnets,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017.
[7] K. Zhao, A. Jain, and M. Zhao, “Automatic attention pruning: Improv-
ing and automating model pruning using attentions,” in International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2023, pp. 10 470–
10 486.
[8] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning
convolutional neural networks for resource efficient inference,” in In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[9] D. Blalock, J. J. Gonzalez Ortiz, J. Frankle, and J. Guttag, “What is the
State of Neural Network Pruning?” in Proceedings of Machine Learning
and Systems, vol. 2, 2020, pp. 129–146.
[10] T. Hoefler, D. Alistarh, T. Ben-Nun, N. Dryden, and A. Peste, “Sparsity
in deep learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training
in neural networks,” The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 22,
no. 1, pp. 10 882–11 005, 2021.
[11] L. Deng, G. Li, S. Han, L. Shi, and Y. Xie, “Model compression and
hardware acceleration for neural networks: A comprehensive survey,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 4, pp. 485–532, 2020.
[12] Y. He, G. Kang, X. Dong, Y. Fu, and Y. Yang, “Soft filter pruning for
accelerating deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the
27th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018, p.
2234–2240.
[13] K. Song, W. Yao, and X. Zhu, “Filter Pruning via Similarity Clustering
for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks,” in International Conference
on Neural Information Processing, 2022, pp. 88–99.
[14] P. Michel, O. Levy, and G. Neubig, “Are Sixteen Heads Really Better
than One?” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alch´e-Buc, E. Fox,
and R. Garnett, Eds., 2019.
[15] P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning
Convolutional Neural Networks for Resource Efficient Inference,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[16] W. Hu, P. Gibson, and J. Cano, “ICE-pick: Iterative cost-efficient
pruning for DNNs,” in ICML 2023 Workshop Neural Compression: From
Information Theory to Applications, 2023.
[17] R. Liu, J. Cao, P. Li, W. Sun, Y. Zhang, and Y. Wang, “Nfp: A no fine-
tuning pruning approach for convolutional neural network compression,”
in 2020 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big
Data (ICAIBD), 2020, pp. 74–77.
[18] S. Roy, P. Panda, G. Srinivasan, and A. Raghunathan, “Pruning filters
while training for efficiently optimizing deep learning networks,” in
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2020, pp. 1–7.
[19] A. Brock, T. Lim, J. M. Ritchie, and N. Weston, “FreezeOut: Accelerate
Training by Progressively Freezing Layers,” in 10th NIPS Workshop on
Optimization for Machine Learning, 2017.
[20] Y. Liu, S. Agarwal, and S. Venkataraman, “AutoFreeze: Automatically
Freezing Model Blocks to Accelerate Fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.01386, 2021.
[21] J. Lee, R. Tang, and J. Lin, “What would elsa do? freezing layers during
transformer fine-tuning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03090, 2019.
[22] U. M. Topc¸uo˘glu and E. Akag¨und¨uz, “Local Masking Meets Progressive
Freezing: Crafting Efficient Vision Transformers for Self-Supervised
Learning,” in Seventeenth International Conference on Machine Vision
(ICMV), 2024.
[23] J. Frankle and M. Carbin, “The Lottery Ticket Hypothesis: Finding
Sparse, Trainable Neural Networks,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2019.
[24] S. Liu, L. Yin, D. C. Mocanu, and M. Pechenizkiy, “Do we actually need
dense over-parameterization? in-time over-parameterization in sparse
training,” in 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, vol.
139, 18–24 Jul 2021, pp. 6989–7000.
[25] Y. Li, C. Wei, and T. Ma, “Towards explaining the regularization effect
of initial large learning rate in training neural networks,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[26] L. Liu, H. Jiang, P. He, W. Chen, X. Liu, J. Gao, and J. Han, “On the
Variance of the Adaptive Learning Rate and Beyond,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[27] H. Li, Z. Xu, G. Taylor, C. Studer, and T. Goldstein, “Visualizing the loss
landscape of neural nets,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 31, 2018.
[28] S. Liu, C. M. J. Tan, and M. Motani, “S-Cyc: A Learning Rate
Schedule for Iterative Pruning of ReLU-based Networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.08764, 2021.
[29] J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. K´egl, “Algorithms for hyper-
parameter optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 24, 2011.
[30] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna:
A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework,” in 25th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, 2019.
[31] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Im-
ages,” University of Toronto, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[32] Y. Le and X. Yang, “Tiny ImageNet Visual Recognition Challenge,”
Stanford University, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[33] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “Imagenet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in 2009 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009, pp. 248–255.
[34] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the Knowledge in a
Neural Network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
[35] J. Turner, E. J. Crowley, V. Radu, J. Cano, A. Storkey, and M. O’Boyle,
“Distilling with Performance Enhanced Students,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.10460, 2019.
[36] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition,” IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
[37] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely
connected convolutional networks,” in IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 4700–4708.
[38] S. Zagoruyko and N. Komodakis, “Wide Residual Networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1605.07146, 2017.
[39] S. Ruder, “An Overview of Gradient Descent Optimization Algorithms,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04747, 2016.
[40] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[41] A. G. Howard, M. Zhu, B. Chen, D. Kalenichenko, W. Wang, T. Weyand,
M. Andreetto, and H. Adam, “MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional
Neural Networks for Mobile Vision Applications,” arXiv:1704.04861,
2017.
[42] J. Ye, X. Chen, N. Xu, C. Zu, Z. Shao, S. Liu, Y. Cui, Z. Zhou,
C. Gong, Y. Shen, J. Zhou, S. Chen, T. Gui, Q. Zhang, and X. Huang,
“A Comprehensive Capability Analysis of GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 Series
Models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.10420, 2023.
