AdaptCache: KV Cache Native Storage Hierarchy for Low-Delay
and High-Quality Language Model Serving
Shaoting Feng∗,1
Hanchen Li∗,1
Kuntai Du1
Zhuohan Gu1
Yuhan Liu1
Jiayi Yao1
Siddhant Ray1
Samuel Shen1
Yihua Cheng1
Ganesh Ananthanarayanan2
Junchen Jiang1
1University of Chicago
2Microsoft
Abstract
Large language model (LLM) applications often reuse previously
processed context, such as chat history and documents, which in-
troduces significant redundant computation. Existing LLM serving
systems address such redundant computation by storing the KV
caches of processed context and loading the corresponding KV
cache when a new request reuses the context. Further, as these LLM
applications scale, the total size of KV caches becomes excessively
large and requires both DRAM and SSD for full storage.
However, prior work that stores KV caches in DRAM and SSD
suffers from high loading delays, as most KV cache hits come from
SSD, which is slow to load. To increase the KV cache hit rate on
DRAM, we identify lossy KV cache compression as a promising
approach. We design a lossy compression system that decides the
compression algorithm, compression rate and device placement
for each KV cache entry to maximise DRAM hits and minimise
loading delay without significantly degrading generation quality.
Compared to various static compression baselines across three
tasks, our system AdaptCache achieves 1.43–2.4 × delay savings
at the same quality and 6–55% quality improvements at the same
delay.
1
Introduction
With the accelerating adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs),
inference systems must provide low-delay responses to meet grow-
ing user demands. To achieve this, many systems store and reuse
the KV cache of previously processed contexts (e.g., chat history) to
reduce redundant computation and speed up inference. However,
due to the rapid growth of LLM applications, the size of KV caches
also quickly increases and exceeds the storage capacity of both
GPU and CPU memory. For example, even with two H100 nodes
(each with 80GB GPU memory) and a total of 150GB CPU memory,
models like Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct can only store the KV caches of
500K tokens, roughly corresponding to the chat histories of 30 users.
This issue becomes more severe in agentic applications, where even
a single run involves multiple agents that continuously exchange
the text with each other, resulting in a context of millions of tokens
and the corresponding KV cache size of 3TB. This underscores the
need to fully leverage hierarchical storage within the datacenter to
ensure high cache hit rates, reduce delay, and increase throughput.
There is a line of work [2, 3] that explores storing KV caches in
hierarchical storage (in this paper we focus on DRAM and SSD).
However, we observe that these approaches still have high delay, be-
cause high-speed devices have limited storage space, which forces
most of the KV caches to be stored to SSD, leading to slow KV cache
loading time overall. To allow more cache hits on DRAM, we iden-
tify lossy KV cache compression [11, 13] as a promising approach:
∗Equal contribution
Number of KV cache: Low
Adaptive 
compression
across device 
& request
Number of KV cache: High
DRAM
Token Dropping Quantization
SSD
…
…
Loading time: High
Loading time: Low
Still have the same average quality!
Same 
compression
across device 
& request
Figure 1: AdaptCache increases cache hit in high-speed device and
reduces loading time in low-speed device while maintaining high
generation quality
by lossily compressing the KV caches, we can store much more KV
cache entries in CPU memory without significant degredation of
generation quality1.
As a result, our goal is to design a lossy KV cache storage sys-
tem on a hierarchical storage (DRAM and SSD) that ensures low
inference latency with minimum quality degredation.
This paper argues that, instead of applying the same compression
(i.e., using the same compression algorithm and compression rate
across devices) to all KV caches, we need to adaptively adjust the
compression algorithm, compression rate and device placement to
achieve optimal KV cache compression. Concretely:
• Compression algorithm needs to be aware of the context - Some
texts are only important at the beginning and the end (which is
suitable for token dropping), but some texts aim to provide new
information for the LLM (where quantization might be better).
• Compression ratio and device placement need to be aware of the
content and the reuse frequency. Some KV caches are frequently
reused and easy-to-be-compressed and they need to be stored in
CPU memory with a high compression ratio, but some KV caches
are not reused frequently and difficult to compress, so it may be
suitable to place them on disk with a low compression ratio.
Figure 1 shows that, if we optimally adapt the compression al-
gorithm, rate and device, the potential of improvement is huge:
we can achieve much higher KV cache hit rate on CPU and much
lower average loading time from disk, while still having comparable
accuracy as applying same compression across devices.
To address these challenges, we propose AdaptCache, the first
hierarchical KV cache storage system leveraging lossy KV cache
compression. The core of AdaptCache is a utility metric that allows
1Generation quality is defined as the similarity between the generated answer after
compression and the original prefill answer, measured by task-specific metrics, i.e., F1,
ROUGE-L [9] or CodeBLEU [12].
arXiv:2509.00105v2  [cs.OS]  15 Jan 2026


1.43× faster
1.48× faster
2.4× faster
41% higher
6% higher
55% higher
Figure 2: AdaptCache achieves 1.43–2.4 × lower TTFT and 6–55% higher quality compared to fixed compression method and rate
us to quantify the effect of storing KV caches in terms of both qual-
ity and loading delay. Then, we use marginal utility gain to evaluate
the effect of each design decisions – compression algorithm, com-
pression rate, cache placement and eviction – and pick the design
decision with the highest marginal utility gain. Acknowledging
that this design is greedy and not necessarily optimal, we argue
that it suffices to deliver significant delay reduction and accuracy
improvement in practice, and optimal solution is not trackable since
it is NP-hard.
To evaluate AdaptCache, we use the popular Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
model and three LongBench datasets. Compared to the strongest
fixed compression baseline, AdaptCache is 1.43–2.4× faster at the
same quality and improves quality by 6–55% under the same delay.
2
AdaptCache Design
AdaptCache has three main components: an estimator, a policy
optimizer, and an executor. The estimator does offline profiling
to estimate the quality–delay curve for each entry, compression
method and storage device. The policy optimizer makes compres-
sion decisions for incoming and existing KV cache entries. The
executor implements the compression decisions.
Estimator: Our offline profiler uses dummy questions to mea-
sure the transfer delays of each storage device and decompression
overhead. It also samples ten entries from each dataset, using ques-
tions generated by GPT 4o, to generate the quality–compression
rate curve for each compression method. We estimate the future
cache hit frequency of one KV cache entry using its historical hit
frequency.
Utility definition: The objective of AdaptCache is to minimize
average system delay while maintaining high quality. To capture
this trade-off, we compute a quality-delay weighted sum for each
KV cache entry. Since some entries are reused more frequently than
others, storing these in limited storage can increase the overall hit
rate thus reducing delay. Therefore, we define each entry’s utility
as the product of its estimated future occurrence frequency and its
quality-delay weighted sum:
Utility(𝑖) = Freq(𝑖) · (𝛼× Quality(𝑖, 𝑀𝑖, 𝑅𝑖) −size(𝑖, 𝑀𝑖, 𝑅𝑖)
Bandwidth
where 𝑖represents the i-th KV cache entry, 𝑀𝑖and 𝑅𝑖are the
compression method and rate used.
The objective of AdaptCache can be expressed as to maximise
the total utility across all KV cache entries. Mathematically, this is
an NP-hard Multi-Choice Knapsack Problem (MCKP). We adopt a
greedy approach based on the textbook solution [7] that achieves
Linear Programming Optimality. When a new KV cache entry is
generated, we compute the following metric for both the new entry
and all entries in storage. We define
Utility(𝑖,𝑚) −Utility(𝑖,𝑛)
size(𝑖) × (𝑚−𝑛)
as the marginal utility drop, i.e., the utility drop per unit of
space saved if we compress furthermore or evict the entry. 𝑚and 𝑛
are different compression rates.
For each storage tier, we will greedily decide the compression
choice (to evict, store in full quality or compress each entry) that
results in the minimal marginal utility drop.
3
Preliminary Results
Evaluation setup: We use 1,100 contexts from six LongBench
datasets [1, 4–6, 10, 15, 16] to evaluate AdaptCache, covering three
task types, summarization, question answering (QA) and coding.
These datasets do not contain the timestamps for request arrival,
thus we follow previous works to generate request arritval times-
tamps using Poisson distribution with different request rates [3,
8, 14]. Experiments are run on one NVIDIA A100 GPU (100 GB
DRAM, 400 GB SSD) using Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct model. The disk
reading throughput is 1 GB/s. The baselines we compare are:
• Without Compression denotes offloading KV cache to DRAM and
SSD without compression.
• KIVI LRU / StreamingLLM LRU use KIVI [11] and StreamingLLM [13]
with fixed compression rates, and offload KV cache to DRAM and
SSD using a Least Recently Used (LRU) policy.
• Prefill denotes prefilling (recomputation).
Overall results: As shown in Figure 2, across three tasks, Adapt-
Cache consistently reduces time to first token (TTFT) compared
to all baselines. Compared to naive prefill and offloading, Adapt-
Cache reduces TTFT by 56%, achieving within 15% quality drop.
Compared to KIVI, AdaptCache reduces TTFT by 69% at the same
quality. Finally, compared to StreamingLLM, AdaptCache greatly
improves quality by 15–89% at the same TTFT.
Understanding AdaptCache’s improvements: AdaptCache out-
performs approaches that use no compression or fixed compression
rates by detecting speed differences between devices and aggres-
sively compressing the KV cache. This strategy significantly in-
creases the hit rate on high-speed devices, leading to much lower
loading delay and reduced TTFT. For example, in the coding task,
KIVI LRU achieves a DRAM cache hit rate of 38% when quan-
tized to 2 bits. In contrast, our method achieves hit rates of 81%,
2


56%, 44%, and 11%, for different weights between delay and qual-
ity. AdaptCache also prioritises compressing and storing KV cache
from longer contexts or those with high information redundancy,
and selects optimal compression algorithms for each entry, thereby
ensuring overall high response quality.
References
[1] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang,
Zhengxiao Du, Xiao Liu, Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and Juanzi
Li. Longbench: A bilingual, multitask benchmark for long context understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14508, 2023.
[2] Weijian Chen, Shuibing He, Haoyang Qu, Ruidong Zhang, Siling Yang, Ping
Chen, Yi Zheng, Baoxing Huai, and Gang Chen. {IMPRESS}: An {Importance-
Informed}{Multi-Tier} prefix {KV} storage system for large language model
inference. In 23rd USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 25),
pages 187–201, 2025.
[3] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevdjic, Junbo
Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. {Cost-Efficient} large language
model serving for multi-turn conversations with {CachedAttention}. In 2024
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24), pages 111–126, 2024.
[4] Bogdan Gliwa, Iwona Mochol, Maciej Biesek, and Aleksander Wawer. Samsum
corpus: A human-annotated dialogue dataset for abstractive summarization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12237, 2019.
[5] Daya Guo, Canwen Xu, Nan Duan, Jian Yin, and Julian McAuley. Longcoder:
A long-range pre-trained language model for code completion. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12098–12107. PMLR, 2023.
[6] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A
large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension,
2017.
[7] Hans Kellerer, Ulrich Pferschy, and David Pisinger. Multidimensional knapsack
problems. In Knapsack problems, pages 235–283. Springer, 2004.
[8] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng,
Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient mem-
ory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In
Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages 611–
626, 2023.
[9] Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In
Text Summarization Branches Out, pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[10] Tianyang Liu, Canwen Xu, and Julian McAuley. Repobench: Benchmarking
repository-level code auto-completion systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03091,
2023.
[11] Zirui Liu, Jiayi Yuan, Hongye Jin, Shaochen Zhong, Zhaozhuo Xu, Vladimir
Braverman, Beidi Chen, and Xia Hu. Kivi: A tuning-free asymmetric 2bit quanti-
zation for kv cache. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02750, 2024.
[12] Shuo Ren, Daya Guo, Shuai Lu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Duyu Tang, Neel Sun-
daresan, Ming Zhou, Ambrosio Blanco, and Shuai Ma. Codebleu: a method for
automatic evaluation of code synthesis, 2020.
[13] Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis.
Efficient streaming language models with attention sinks.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.17453, 2023.
[14] Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya
Siddhant, Aditya Barua, and Colin Raffel. mt5: A massively multilingual pre-
trained text-to-text transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11934, 2020.
[15] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse,
explainable multi-hop question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600, 2018.
[16] Ming Zhong, Da Yin, Tao Yu, Ahmad Zaidi, Mutethia Mutuma, Rahul Jha,
Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Asli Celikyilmaz, Yang Liu, Xipeng Qiu, et al. Qmsum:
A new benchmark for query-based multi-domain meeting summarization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2104.05938, 2021.
3
