EVICPRESS: Joint KV-Cache Compression and Eviction for Efficient LLM Serving
Shaoting Feng∗,1
Yuhan Liu∗,1
Hanchen Li2
Xiaokun Chen3
Samuel Shen3
Kuntai Du3
Zhuohan Gu4
Rui Zhang5 Yuyang Huang1 Yihua Cheng3 Jiayi Yao1 Qizheng Zhang6 Ganesh Ananthanarayanan7 Junchen Jiang1,3
1University of Chicago
2UC Berkeley
3Tensormesh, Inc.
4MIT
5UC Santa Cruz
6Stanford
7Microsoft
Abstract
Reusing KV cache is essential for high efficiency of Large
Language Model (LLM) inference systems. With more LLM
users, the KV cache footprint can easily exceed GPU memory
capacity, so prior work has proposed to either evict KV cache
to lower-tier storage devices, or compress KV cache so that
more KV cache can be fit in the fast memory. However, prior
work misses an important opportunity: jointly optimizing the
eviction and compression decisions across all KV caches to
minimize average generation latency without hurting quality.
We propose EVICPRESS, a KV-cache management sys-
tem that applies lossy compression and adaptive eviction to
KV cache across multiple storage tiers. Specifically, for each
KV cache of a context, EVICPRESS considers the effect of
compression and eviction of the KV cache on the average
generation quality and delay across all contexts as a whole.
To achieve this, EVICPRESS proposes a unified utility func-
tion that quantifies the effect of quality and delay of the lossy
compression or eviction. To this end, EVICPRESS’s profiling
module periodically updates the utility function scores on all
possible eviction-compression configurations for all contexts
and places KV caches using a fast heuristic to rearrange KV
caches on all storage tiers, with the goal of maximizing the
utility function scores on each storage tier. Compared to the
baselines that evict KV cache or compress KV cache, EVIC-
PRESS achieves higher KV-cache hit rates on fast devices, i.e.,
lower delay, while preserving high generation quality by ap-
plying conservative compression to contexts that are sensitive
to compression errors. Evaluation on 12 datasets and 5 mod-
els demonstrates that EVICPRESS achieves up to 2.19× faster
time-to-first-token (TTFT) at equivalent generation quality.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) are used ubiquitously, in
chatbot, agentic, personal assistance, and many other use
cases. Thus, improving the efficiency of LLM inference, which
provides low-delay experience for users at a low compute cost,
is one of the most important problems in both industry and
academia. To this end, reusing KV cache—the intermediate
states generated during LLM inference—has become the de-
facto optimization in modern LLM inference systems. By
storing and reusing the KV cache of a context in different
requests, the inference latency could be significantly reduced,
and throughput can be greatly improved [22,29,53,54].
*Equal contribution
Time-to-first-token (TTFT)
Quality
Fixed compression rate 
+ LRU based eviction
LRU based eviction
w/o compression
Aggressive compression without eviction
Full prefill
CacheServe
Better
Figure 1: EVICPRESS jointly optimizes offloading and com-
pression, achieving much better trade-off in terms of quality
and TTFT. This figure is illustrative.
Realizing the potential performance benefit, however,
brings a new system challenge: the total size of KV cache that
needs to be stored continues to grow due to growing model
context window limits and an increased number of concur-
rent users being served. Thus, it is challenging to fit all KV
cache inside GPU memory. Two lines of work exist to avoid
re-computing the KV caches that do not fit in GPU memory.
First, KV cache eviction1 has been proposed to improve the
cache hit rate [6,38,59]. These works apply classic caching
policies, such as least recent used (LRU), to evict KV cache
from GPU memory to lower-tier storage devices, which have
larger and cheaper space. This might increase the cache hit
rate by allowing more KV caches to be stored and thus avoid
repeatedly recomputing the KV cache. The second line of
work applies KV cache compression to reduce the memory
footprint of each KV cache, allowing more KV caches to fit
in the GPU memory [17,18,31,32,63].
However, both eviction and compression approaches are
limited when used separately. When compression is applied,
prior works only consider using more aggressive compression
when reaching the space limit of the storage devices, and do
not consider the possibility of eviction or simply using tradi-
tional eviction policies, such as LRU [17,18,31,32]. When
eviction is applied, these works do not adapt compression
configurations based on the eviction decisions [6,38,59]. This
1KV cache eviction, in this work, means that a KV cache is moved from a
faster storage device to the next tier, slower, device. It does not mean deleting
the KV cache from the system.
1
arXiv:2512.14946v1  [cs.OS]  16 Dec 2025


Fast Storage 
(20GB/s)
Slow Storage
(2GB/s)
Context 1 
(No quality drop 
w/ compression)
Context 2 
(Quality collapse w/ 
any compression)
Compression
+ Eviction
(Ours)
Compression
Only
Eviction
Only
Low 
Quality
High TTFT
High Quality
Low TTFT
2GB
8 GB
4GB
0.2 GB
8 GB
4GB
4GB
8 GB
Figure 2: A simple example to illustrate the benefit of jointly
deciding compression and eviction. Consider two KV caches
(a 4 GB KV cache that can be compressed to 5% without
quality drop, and a 8 GB KV cache where slight compression
drops its quality to 50%), which are originally stored on a
fast memory (20GB/s loading bandwidth) and a slow device
(2GB/s). A compression-only scheme compresses both KV
caches by half, causing low TTFT (0.3 seconds) but low qual-
ity (only 75%); an eviction-only scheme evicts half of the KV
cache to slow storage, which has high quality (100%) but with
high TTFT (2.4 seconds) when reusing the evicted KV cache;
by considering compression and eviction, we simultaneously
achieve high quality (100%) and low TTFT (0.5 seconds).
is often suboptimal. As shown in Figure 2, if we consider KV
cache for two contexts (context 1 is 4 GB in size and context 2
is 8 GB), context 1 can keep a quality score of 100% even it is
aggressively compressed, while context 2’s quality collapses
to 50% even with minimal compression. When compression-
only is applied, compressing both KV cache to 50% of their
original size, the quality score degrades to 50% for context
2, with an average quality of 75% and average TTFT of 0.3
seconds. When eviction only is applied, context 1 is evicted to
slow device, and context 2 is kept at the fast device, achieving
a quality score of 100% and TTFT of 2.4 seconds. A better
choice is to combine compression and eviction, specifically
keeping context 2 in fast storage, and compressing context 1’s
KV cache to 0.2GB and evicted to slow storage. This achieves
100% quality score with TTFT of 0.5 seconds.
Prior works do not consider decisions of eviction or com-
pression on all contexts, primarily due to the huge search
space this problem incurs. First, when applying compression,
compression methods and rates can be adapted. Secondly,
compression needs to be combined with eviction; for exam-
ple, after a certain compression rate, eviction should be used
to avoid a huge quality drop. Furthermore, when dealing with
any context’s KV cache, considering the impact of compres-
sion and eviction on itself is not enough; instead, its impact
on other contexts also needs to be considered. Compressing a
KV cache to a moderate rate and placing it on a fast storage
device is beneficial to its quality and TTFT; however, this
space can be used to store substantially more KV cache that
can be aggressively compressed to improve overall TTFT and
quality.
A key insight is that different contexts benefit differently
from compression or eviction, since they have various sensi-
tivities to lossy compression (§3.1). Some contexts are highly
sensitive to compression errors, and even a conservative com-
pression ratio can lead to a huge quality drop; while others
can be largely compressed without affecting generation qual-
ity. Thus, compression and eviction decisions should be made
globally to consider the sensitivities of all contexts in the sys-
tem. For example, we should choose to evict highly sensitive
contexts that suffer greatly from lossy compression when a
higher storage tier is full, while bringing up KV cache from a
lower tier that has lower sensitivity to compress them aggres-
sively to fit into the higher storage tier.
Making global cache management decisions based on all
contexts creates a search space to the power of the number
of contexts. To make it practical, our paper proposes a utility
function, taking the storage tier, compression method, and rate
as input, outputting a single score that quantitatively measures
the effect of each decision on delay and quality. This allows
us to easily compute the overall delay and quality trade-off
based on all contexts for each cache management decision.
Putting it together, we propose EVICPRESS, a system
that adaptively chooses the optimal compression-eviction
configuration—whether to evict, to which storage device, and
whether to compress, by what method and at which ratio—on
a per KV-cache (per context) basis. EVICPRESS first calcu-
lates all possible configurations’ utility function scores for
each context, based on a set of initially generated queries.
Then EVICPRESS puts KV cache that maximizes the total util-
ity function score on a certain storage device. Since real-world
queries may drift from the initial set of queries, EVICPRESS
records new incoming queries for each context, and performs
periodic re-profiling based on the newest set of queries. After
re-profiling, EVICPRESS uses a greedy-based algorithm to
re-arrange KV cache in different storage tiers, such that the
utility function scores can be maximized on each tier.
We implement EVICPRESS within the existing LLM serv-
ing stack by extending vLLM and LMCache with ~3K lines
of code that add multi-tier KV-cache placement, compression,
and eviction control. Concretely, our implementation inter-
cepts KV-cache lookups, retrievals, and stores, applies per-
context compression/eviction policies, and integrates tightly
with vLLM’s paged GPU memory management to orchestrate
cache movement across GPU, CPU, and SSD tiers.
In short, our contributions are:
• We design and implement EVICPRESS, the first system that
jointly considers both lossy compression and eviction for a
multi-tier KV cache eviction system.
• We propose a utility function that quantifies the effect of
lossy compression and eviction on both quality and delay to
make cache management decisions. Using this utility func-
tion, EVICPRESS can compare all feasible compression-
2


eviction configurations at once with a clear optimization
criterion.
• We implement EVICPRESS in the state-of-the-art inference
engine, vLLM [24], and show that compared to baselines
that apply the same compression methods and ratios on
all contexts, EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.43–3.77×
across five different models with the same quality score;
compared to the baseline that only applies LRU-based evic-
tion, EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.22 to 1.56× within
3% quality drop, and improves inference throughput by
2.0–3.6× compared best baseline at a quality score target
of 80%.
We should note that the idea of using utility function
which captures the effect of delay and quality and adapt-
ing compression configurations based on sensitivity are not
new [23, 39, 55, 62]. However, we are the first to apply the
utility function to enable the joint optimization of eviction
and compression, achieving much better results than fixed
compression or eviction.
2
Background
2.1
KV cache reusing and eviction in LLMs
LLM inference includes two phases, the prefill phase where
the entire input context is fed into the LLM at once to produce
the KV cache, and decode phase where the KV cache is used
to generate consecutive output tokens. The prefill phase is
computation-heavy, especially under long-context scenarios,
since its computational complexity grows super-linearly with
the input length. To accelerate the prefill phase, many recent
systems improve inference efficiency by storing and reusing
previously computed KV caches to skip redundant computa-
tion [15,29,31]. Prior works in systems mainly focused on
KV cache management inside a hierarchical storage system.
To reduce memory waste, vLLM [24] uses PagedAttention
to handle the KV cache in smaller, page-like blocks instead
of large contiguous chunks, reducing memory fragmentation.
SGLang [60] optimizes computation and memory usage by
employing a tree-based caching mechanism called RadixAt-
tention, which stores KV caches in a radix tree and maintains
them via a least recently used (LRU) eviction policy. Some re-
cent works further push the boundary by extending KV cache
management across the memory hierarchy and storage. LM-
Cache [29] reuses KV caches for any repeated text, regardless
of whether it is a prefix, and offloads KV caches that are not
selected to hierarchical caching devices such as CPU memory.
Works like Mooncake [37], Attentionstore [13], and InstIn-
fer [34] leverage disaggregated resources (i.e., CPU, DRAM,
and SSD) to offload KV caches and accelerate LLM serving.
2.2
KV cache compression
Due to the relatively large sizes of KV caches (7.81 GB for
32k token context in Qwen3-32B), much previous work has
Dataset
Length (mean) Type of contexts
#Contexts
Samsum
11586
Few-shot
50
TriviaQA
12311
Few-shot
50
MultiNews
2741
Multi-document
50
2wikimQA
7526
Multi-document
50
Qasper
4885
Single-document 50
NarrativeQA 40003
Single-document 50
Table 1: Lengths, type and number of contexts used in §3.
been done on compressing KV cache. KV cache compression
gives two key benefits in LLM serving. First, by reducing
the size of each cache entry, one can store more KV caches
within a given memory budget, which increases the proba-
bility of reuse and leads to higher cache hit rates. Second, it
substantially reduces the data transfer overhead in offloading-
based inference systems where KV caches are stored in CPU
or SSD memory. This is crucial since transferring large KV
caches over bandwidth-limited interconnects can become a
performance bottleneck.
There have been many KV cache compression methods,
and they differ in both quality retention and system efficiency.
These methods can be broadly categorized into: (1) token
dropping (e.g., H2O, SnapKV) [27, 59], which selectively
removes less important tokens from the KV cache; (2) quanti-
zation (e.g., CacheGen (Adaptive quantization), KIVI (Uni-
form quantization)) [31, 32], which reduces the bit-width
representation of KV entries; (3) merging (e.g., HOMER,
Look-M) [42,45]; (4) prompt compression (e.g., LLMlingua,
LongLLMlingua) [19,20].
Due to the different natures of these categories, these meth-
ods have widely different performances. As we demonstrate
later in Sec 3.2, depending on the specific model size, dataset
properties, and generation lengths, different methods will have
different tradeoffs. Some methods, like CacheGen or KIVI,
have a decompression overhead, while others, like H2O, can
be directly used in decoding. Moreover, more novel research
on KV cache compression is being created on top of previ-
ous work every month. Yet there is no principled method to
choose and adopt this wide variety of compression algorithms
in real systems.
3
Motivation
The most straightforward way of managing KV cache memory
is to either apply uniform compression or to use a cache
eviction scheme, such as Least Recently Used (LRU) or Least
Frequently Used (LFU), on all contexts. Both compression
and eviction can greatly improve inference throughput, either
by compressing the memory footprint of KV cache, so it
is faster to fetch from remote storage devices [22, 28, 31],
or by keeping KV cache that is more likely to be needed
in the near future in faster storage devices to make loading
faster [5,11,13,29].
However, as we will show in this section, further optimiza-
3


tion is possible, as KV cache management decisions should
depend on context-specific characteristics.
In this section, we present an empirical study with six
datasets from LongBench dataset [3], which is a widely-used
dataset for verifying LLM’s ability to answer long-context
questions. The dataset details are shown in Table 1. Specif-
ically, we randomly draw 50 contexts from 12 datasets in
the LongBench [3] dataset, covering various types of tasks,
including few-shot, single-document question answering, and
multi-document question answering.
3.1
Why not compress or evict all contexts?
KV caches for some contexts are highly sensitive to compres-
sion errors: even applying an extremely conservative compres-
sion ratio can lead to a substantial quality drop. In contrast,
other contexts are minimally affected. This leads to our first
insight as follows.
Insight 1 Different contexts have different sensitivities to
compression errors, thus simply applying the same eviction
or compression schemes on all contexts is not optimal.
Figure 3 illustrates this, where the CDF of compression
error sensitivities, defined as relative quality drop under a
compression ratio of 0.92, is plotted with datasets in Table 1
of different types. The figure is plotted with the Llama-3.1-
8B-Instruct model with keydiff compression. As shown
in the figure, for example, Wikipedia articles (2wikimQA)
have high sensitivities, with median of 0.681. Our intuition
is that critical information is distributed at a high density in
all contexts. Meanwhile, story narratives (NarrativeQA) have
a much lower sensitivity, with a median of 0.340, since they
are based on dialogues containing redundant information.
Moreover, we find that even though two datasets belong
to the same type of context, they may have completely dif-
ferent distribution of sensitivities. For example, Samsum and
TriviaQA are both few-shot datasets, where several example
question-answer pairs are provided to LLMs before answer-
ing the real questions, while Samsum has sensitivity with a
median of 0.676 and TriviaQA has sensitivity with a median
of 0.392. Also, MultiNews samples are multi-document con-
texts, where multiple news articles are concatenated to form
each sample, and Qasper samples are single-document, where
each sample only contains a single document on a specific
topic. However, the MultiNews and Qasper datasets have very
similar median sensitivities, 0.738 and 0.759 specifically.
Overall, sensitivities vary significantly across contexts.
Specifically, the coefficient of variation (a measure of vari-
ance) is from 0.078 to 0.394, and this shows that different
contexts have very different sensitivities, even within the same
dataset.
2Compression ratio is defined as the ratio between compressed KV cache
size and original KV cache size.
3.2
Why not the same compression method
and ratio for all contexts?
Another natural question to ask is why not apply a fixed com-
pression method and ratio on all contexts? As also discussed
in §2.2, many parameters can be adjusted, including differ-
ent compression methods and compression ratios for each
method. As different methods look at different metrics for
dropping information from the KV cache, we hypothesize
that different contexts have their own optimal compression
method and ratios.
Insight 2 The optimal compression method and ratio cannot
be simply determined by the lengths of contexts or the type of
contexts.
To verify this, in Figure 4, we plot the length distribution for
three groups of contexts whose optimal compression methods
are kvzip, knorm and snapkv, respectively. Here, optimal
compression method is defined as the method with the lowest
quality3 drop at the same compression ratio. There are 40.3%,
40.0% and 19.7% contexts whose optimal methods are kvzip,
knorm and snapkv, suggesting that there is no dominant com-
pression method that works for all contexts, and per-context
method adaptation is needed. Furthermore, we can see that
the context lengths distribution for the three groups overlaps
with each other, indicating that there is not a clear relationship
between context length and which compression method to
select.
Secondly, in Figure 5, we plot the mean optimal compres-
sion ratio and the standard deviation for different datasets
in Table 1. The optimal compression ratio is defined as the
ratio with best quality-delay trade-off among all compres-
sion methods4. We can see that even within each dataset, the
optimal compression ratio varies greatly across different con-
texts, with coefficient of variation being 0.068 to 0.806. This
shows that the optimal compression ratios cannot be simply
determined by the dataset.
Moreover, we observe that even though two datasets belong
to the same type, such as MultiNews and Musique, which are
both multi-document contexts, they have non-overlapping dis-
tributions. This suggests that the optimal compression ratios
cannot be trivially determined by type of contexts either.
4
EVICPRESS Design
We now describe the design of EVICPRESS, starting with
an overall workflow (§4.1), a utility function that determines
the quality-rate trade-off of each compression configuration
3Generation quality is defined as the similarity between the generated
answer after compression and the original prefill answer.
4To measure the correlation between TTFT and quality, we use
normalized quality−normalized TTFT to make sure that quality and TTFT
are comparable in terms of scale.
4


0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
samsum
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
triviaqa
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.5
1.0
multi_news
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Relative Quality Drop
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
2wikimqa
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Relative Quality Drop
0.0
0.5
1.0
qasper
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Relative Quality Drop
0.0
0.5
1.0
narrativeqa
Figure 3: Different contexts have different compression error sensitivities in the six datasets mentioned in Table 1. Compression
error sensitivity is defined as the quality score drop when applied with keydiff compression at a ratio of 0.9. Plotted with
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct.
kvzip
knorm
snapkv
Method
0
10000
20000
30000
Length
Figure 4: Length distributions for contexts whose least quality
drop occurs when using kvzip, knorm, and snapkv, under a
compression ratio of 0.6.
(§4.2), a profiling mechanism to determine the right compres-
sion configuration for each context (§4.3), and a policy to
manage the KV cache when a storage tier is full (§4.4).
4.1
Overall workflow
EVICPRESS contains two phases: an initial offline phase and
an online inference phase.
Initial offline phase: During the initial offline phase, EVIC-
PRESS’s profiler (§4.3) computes the utility function scores
(§4.2) for all possible eviction-compression configurations of
each context. To compute the quality and delay items in the
utility function, we use an initial set of generated questions
for each context.
Online inference phase: In the online inference phase, when
a user request comes in, the lookup module first determines
whether the KV cache for the requested context exists in
the multi-tier storage system managed by EVICPRESS. If
samsum
triviaqa
multi_news
musique
qasper
narrativeqa
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Optimal Compression Ratio
Figure 5: Different types of contexts have different optimal
compression ratios. Here, each bar shows the mean and stan-
dard deviation of optimal compression ratios for different type
of contexts.
it exists, EVICPRESS’s retriever fetches the KV cache from
the location that the lookup module returns. If it does not,
the KV cache is generated by the LLM, and then saved by
EVICPRESS to the remote disk, which is assumed to have
unlimited space. As the online queries may differ from the
initial set of profile queries, EVICPRESS’s profiling module
also performs periodic re-profiling based on an updated set of
queries for each context, when the achieved quality is lower
than threshold X% and free GPU cycles are available.
Note that the KV cache storing operation runs on the CPU,
which does not block the online inference computations for
other queries. Furthermore, the re-profiling step first com-
presses the KV cache into multiple versions and runs decod-
ing phases with different KV cache versions. Both the com-
5


User
Lookup
module
Inference Phase
KV cache
exists
KV cache
doesn’t exist
CPU
Local SSD
Remote Disk
KV cache
retriever
KV cache
Saving generated KV
cache to remote disk
Profiler
module (4.3)
Choosing eviction-
compression
configuration (4.4)
Utility function scores
(4.2)
Updated
eviction-
compression
configurations
Periodically fetching all KV cache
and new queries
Non-
blocking to
inference
Figure 6: End-to-end workflow of EVICPRESS.
pression step and decoding computations are lightweight in
terms of GPU computations, and can be batched with other re-
quests’ decoding computations. As we will show soon (§6.3),
re-profiling incurs minimal system overhead.
4.2
Utility function: Balancing quality and
loading delay
Each compression and eviction configuration presents a point
on the generation quality and loading delay trade-off. To
easily measure the impact of each configuration on quality
and loading delay, we design a utility function which outputs
a single score for each eviction-compression configuration –
the storage tier that the eviction scheme offloads KV cache
to, and the compression method and ratio it applies:
Util(method,ratio,device) = (α·quality−TTFT)·frequency,
where α is the trade-off parameter between quality and load-
ing delay — higher α improves the quality of EVICPRESS at
the cost of higher loading delay in average, and in our eval-
uation we will vary α to show the trade-off of EVICPRESS
between quality and loading delay.
In the above equation, the input to the function is the stor-
age device tier which the eviction algorithm sends the KV
cache to, and the compression method/ratio that is applied.
The quality is computed based on the compression method
and ratio, averaged across all the data in the profiling query
set; the delay item is computed with estimated latency to
fetch a (compressed) KV cache from the corresponding stor-
age device; and the frequency item is the number of times the
context is accessed.
To make it concrete, take the examples from §3.1,
when using keydiff compression, across the contexts from
2wikimQA dataset which has higher sensitivity, with com-
pression ratio of 0.6, we can reach a quality score of 0.65
and TTFT of 0.05 seconds; while across contexts from Narra-
tiveQA dataset that has lower sensitivity, with compression
ratio of 0.9, we can get a quality score of 0.67 with TTFT
of 0.05 seconds. Assuming α = 1 and equal frequency for
each context, the utility function score is 0.607 and 0.621 re-
spectively. The configuration of (keydiff, 0.6, CPU) is strictly
worse than (keydiff, 0.9, CPU) as the former one has the same
TTFT and lower quality. This is reflected by the utility func-
tion score too, with the former one having a lower score than
the latter.
The system enables users to navigate the trade-off between
generation quality and latency with the tunable parameter
α. A larger α prioritizes generation quality, while a smaller
α prioritizes smaller TTFT. For example, in the 2wikimQA
dataset, a compression ratio of 0.4 yields a quality score of
0.82 and a TTFT of 0.20 seconds, whereas a ratio of 0.2
improves quality to 0.92 but increases TTFT to 0.24 seconds.
Consequently, if a user sets α > 0.3, the utility function favors
the higher quality provided by the 0.2 ratio; conversely, a
lower α prioritizes the latency reduction offered by the 0.4
ratio.
Another important design question when calculating the
utility function is: what is a suitable granularity to compute
this utility function on? EVICPRESS computes this utility
function based on context-level, instead of chunk-level which
splits the whole context’s KV cache into multiple chunks,
or token-level. This is because context-level profiling has a
global view of important token distribution considering the en-
tire context. On the other hand, for chunk-level profiling, some
tokens may be important within the scope of a chunk, while
unimportant at the scope of the whole context. Token-level
profiling is even more suboptimal since quality measurement
is not feasible. And token-level retrieval cannot saturate band-
width and leads to low speed and high overhead because of
inconsistent memory access.
4.3
Profiler module: Computing the utility
function scores and choosing eviction-
compression configuration
Based on insight 1, the compression-eviction configuration
must adapt to different contexts. Insight 2 indicates that the
configuration cannot simply be determined by the character-
istics of the context, such as lengths or types. Thus, instead
of coming up with context characteristics that indicate the
benefits of each configuration, EVICPRESS directly profiles
the impact of all configurations on overall quality and delay.
Specifically, EVICPRESS uses the utility function (§4.2) that
outputs a single score for each configuration of (storage de-
vice, compression method, compression ratio) to capture both
delay and quality.
Before the online inference stage, as the system does not
see any queries before, the profiling module generates a set of
training questions for each context following prior works [10,
47–49,57], to compute the average quality and delay on them.
The questions are generated by the GPT-5 API about different
paragraphs in the contexts, aiming to obtain the eviction-
compression configuration that drops as much redundancy for
each paragraph as possible to reduce delay.
During online inference, as real-world queries may drift
6


from the training queries, the profiling module also period-
ically re-profiles with a newer dataset. The re-profiling is
triggered whenever the quality achieved on the online test-
ing dataset is below the quality achieved on the profiling
dataset by a threshold of X%, and when the system has free
GPU cycles. Note that the profiling process only requires
the KV cache to be compressed with different methods and
ratios, which incurs very minimal overhead, and running the
decoding phase with these different compressed versions. The
decoding phase is known to be largely batchable (batching
with other requests does not increase decoding delay). Thus,
available GPU cycles occur when the number of online infer-
ence requests is smaller than the maximum batch size in the
system. In practice, users can freely adapt X% based on their
quality requirements.
4.4
Eviction-compression configuration selec-
tion module
Given an initial set of contexts, where each context has a set
of generated queries for profiling, EVICPRESS computes the
utility function scores for all possible eviction-compression
configurations on each context. EVICPRESS’s configuration
selection module then places the (compressed) KV cache to
a certain storage tier for each context with the configuration
corresponding to the highest utility function score.
When a storage device S is full, existing KV cache on
that device needs to be updated. Specifically, each context’s
KV cache can be updated either by more aggressive com-
pression to fit in S, or by evicting it to a lower-tier storage
to save space. Each context has (#compression methods ×
#compression ratios × #lower-tier storage devices) of op-
tions to choose from. Here, we filter out options that keep KV
cache on storage S but do not save space (such as keeping the
compression ratios and not evicting to the next tier).
The problem of deciding the configuration for each context
while maximizing the total utility function score on device
S is a Multi-Choice Knapsack Problem, which is NP-hard.
We greedily solve this problem by repeating the greedy pro-
cess of finding updated configurations with the lowest utility
score drop for contexts on S, until the updated KV cache fits
successfully. Then, the same update process is applied recur-
sively if the lower-tier storage is also full. The exact greedy
algorithm for this process is described in §A.
5
Implementation
We implement EVICPRESS on top of vLLM v0.11.2 and
LMCache v0.3.9post2, with about 3K lines of code in
Python based on PyTorch v2.9.
When a new text query comes in, we call LMCache’s KV
cache lookup module, specifically lookup(tokens). If it
finds that the requested KV cache exists in the system, the
number of hit tokens is returned, and the vLLM engine allo-
cates the amount of GPU memory for storing the KV cache for
the hit tokens. Then, LMCache’s retrieve(tokens)->KV
Cache function is triggered to load the KV cache from EVIC-
PRESS-managed multi-tier storage backend, and put it into
the paged GPU memory allocated by vLLM.
If it does not find the requested KV cache, LM-
Cache’s store(tokens, KV Cache) function is triggered
to save the generated KV cache to CPU DRAM, and
then EVICPRESS calls the manage function, which places
the new KV cache on a storage device and updates ex-
isting KV cache entries if the device is full. Specifi-
cally, we use a class KVConfig(KV Cache) which records
the utility function scores for all possible configurations
for the given KV cache. The manage function takes
in [KVConfig(KV Cache 1), ..., KVConfig(KV Cache
n)] and computes (device placement, compression
method, compression ratio) for each KV cache that
needs updating, calculated by EVICPRESS’s configuration
selection module (§4.4). Finally, the manage function updates
those KV caches with the new configuration.
6
Evaluation
The key takeaways from the evaluation are:
• Across 5 models and 555 contexts from 12 datasets from
LongBench [3], EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.43 to
3.77× and improves quality by 13.58% to 55.40% at the
same TTFT, compared to the baseline that combines fixed
compression and classic eviction.
• Compared to smart KV cache eviction system IMPRESS
[5], EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.5 to 5.2 × and im-
proves quality by 14.29% to 27.00% at the same TTFT.
• Compared to full prefill or full eviction, EVICPRESS re-
duces TTFT by 1.29 to 2.19× within 3% of quality drop.
6.1
Evaluation setup
Dataset
Mean
Std
Topic
narrativeqa
108K
55K
Long stories (literature, film).
qasper
24K
12K
NLP research papers
multifieldqa_en
29K
15K
Legal documents and reports.
hotpotqa
57K
18K
Wikipedia articles.
2wikimqa
30K
15K
Wikipedia articles.
musique
69K
9K
Wikipedia articles.
gov_report
54K
34K
US GAO and CRS reports.
qmsum
57K
27K
Meeting scripts and records.
multi_news
12K
10K
News articles on the same event.
trec
30K
12K
News articles and web pages.
triviaqa
47K
25K
Trivia questions.
samsum
34K
17K
Messenger-like conversation histo-
ries.
Table 2: Dataset Statistics and description.
7


Better
Better
Better
Better
Better
Figure 7: EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.43 to 3.77× with the same quality score compared to compression + LRU-based
eviction, and reduces TTFT by 1.22 to 1.56× compared to prefill and eviction only scheme.
LLMs:
We cover a wide range of popular open-source
LLMs, including dense LLMs, including Llama (meta-
llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct), Qwen (Qwen/Qwen2.5-14B-
Instruct), LongChat (lmsys/longchat-7b-v1.5-32k) and Mis-
tral (mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3), and also Mixture-of-
Expert LLM (Qwen/Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507).
Dataset: We use LongBench benchmark [3], which com-
bines many long-context datasets and includes a wide range
of context genres (including government reports, news, con-
versations and stories), as our evaluation dataset. The dataset
statistics, including the mean and standard deviation of the
context lengths, and the dataset description is listed in Table 2.
Query construction: We randomly sampled 555 contexts
from longbench dataset. For each context, we prompts gpt-5
to generate 100 QA queries (following previous works [10,
47–49, 57]), 50 as training queries to build the profiler of
EVICPRESS and 50 for testing.
Hardware: We run our experiments on one 80GB H100
GPU that hosts the model weights for each model. We allocate
80GB CPU DRAM, 800GB SSD, and assume that the remote
storage has unlimited space.
Baselines: We compare EVICPRESS with baselines that apply
KV cache compression or eviction.
• Prefill: This baseline performs full prefill on each query
without prefix caching. We run this with vLLM v0.11.2.
• Eviction only: When a storage tier becomes full, this system
evicts KV cache to the next storage tier using an least-
recently used (LRU) policy, without any compression.
• (keydiff/knorm/snapkv) Compression + LRU-based evic-
tion: This baseline applies either keydiff [35], knorm [9]
or snapkv [27] compression on all contexts. We also vary
the compression ratio for each method, which forms the
quality-TTFT trade-off. At a certain compression ratio,
when a storage tier is full, the system evicts the compressed
KV cache to lower-tier storage with LRU. Among these
methods, keydiff computes the average cosine similarity of
every token to all other tokens, and drops the tokens whose
similarities are high among all; knorm computes the L2
norm of the key cache, and drops those with low L2 norm;
snapkv computes the cross attention between tokens near
the query and the earlier contexts, and drops those tokens
with low cross-attention scores.
• IMPRESS: IMPRESS [5] uses three out of eight attention
heads to compute the attention scores to profile important
tokens in the KV cache. IMPRESS keeps X% of important
tokens whose attention scores are among the top X% of all
tokens. Then it splits each KV cache into chunks, and only
loads KV cache chunks containing important tokens during
inference. We vary X% in our experiments to achieve the
quality-delay trade-off of IMPRESS.
Evaluation metrics:
• Quality score: measures the similarity of answers based on
compressed KV cache vs. answers based on uncompressed
KV cache. Following prior work [2,12,40], we compute the
cosine similarity between the embedding of the generated
8


0
5
10
15
0
2
4
Average TTFT (s)
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
keydiff+LRU-based eviction
impress
ours
knorm+LRU-based eviction
eviction only
snapkv+LRU-based eviction
prefill
0
10
20
30
0
2
4
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
0
2
4
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct
0
5
10
15
QPS
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Average ITL (s)
0
10
20
30
QPS
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
QPS
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Figure 8: EVICPRESS maintains consistently low TTFT and ITL across all QPS levels.
0
10
20
30
40
CPU-hit request %
0.66
0.68
0.70
0.72
Average quality score
0
20
40
60
80
SSD-hit request %
0.62
0.68
0.74
0.80
compression+LRU-based eviction
impress
ours
Figure 9: With Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct, EVICPRESS has higher
fast device (CPU) hit request percentage while maintaining
higher quality.
answer and that of the answer based on uncompressed KV
cache using the MiniLM-L6-v2 model. The higher this score
is, the closer the generated answers is compared to answers
on uncompressed KV cache, which is the better.
• Time-to-first-token (TTFT) is the time between the arrival
of a query to the time of the first generated token. This
includes the delay to retrieve KV cache from the storage
devices, and the time to prefill the new queries.
• Inter-token-latency (ITL) is the average delay for generating
consecutive tokens. ITL reflects the encoding throughput,
and increases when the inference engine has more running
requests.
• End-to-end latency is the time between when the request
comes in and when the last token is received.
6.2
Evaluation results
TTFT v.s. generation quality: In Figure 7, compared to
the baselines that applies keydiff, knorm and snapkv and
LRU-based eviction, EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.43 to
3.77× at the same quality score, and improves quality scores
by 13.58% to 55.40% at the same TTFT. Compared to full
prefill that does not affect generation quality, EVICPRESS
reduces TTFT by 1.29 to 2.19× within 3% of quality drop.
Compared to LRU-based eviction, EVICPRESS reduces TTFT
by 1.22 to 1.56× with quality drop less than 3%. Finally,
compared to IMPRESS, EVICPRESS reduces TTFT by 1.5
to 5.2× without degrading generation quality, or improves
generation quality by 14.29% to 27.00% without increasing
TTFT.
TTFT and ITL v.s. QPS: Figure 8 shows the TTFT and ITL
under different query-per-second (QPS), at a quality score
target of 80% for Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, Mistral-7B-Instruct-
v0.3 and Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct. At the same TTFT level,
EVICPRESS achieves 2.0 to 3.6× higher request processing
rate, compared to the best baseline. Similarly, at the same ITL
level, EVICPRESS achieves 1.9 to 3.4× higher QPS compared
to the best baseline.
EVICPRESS’s improvement: EVICPRESS outperforms dif-
ferent baselines for different reasons. First, compared to the
baselines that apply same compression methods and ratios on
all contexts, EVICPRESS is better as the context sensitivity
difference is considered and eviction-compression configu-
ration is adjusted for different contexts. Secondly, compared
to LRU-based eviction, which evicts all contexts that can-
not fit on the CPU DRAM to lower tier storage, EVICPRESS
9


0.05
0.09
0.13
Quality score
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Minutes since start
0
2
4
Latency (s)
Difference (with  without periodic update)
Figure 10: Quality and latency over time under Azure work-
load [41,46,58] with only one training query per context. Red
vertical lines denote periodic profiling events with Llama-3.1-
8B-Instruct. Frequent profiling at the beginning and around
3.75–4 minutes introduces brief latency spikes, but latency
quickly returns to baseline. As profiling corrects stale com-
pression decisions, model quality steadily improves through-
out execution.
is better since some low-sensitivity contexts can be largely
compressed without being evicted to slow storage. Thirdly,
compared to full prefill which incurs significant amount of
GPU computation, EVICPRESS is better since the prefill com-
putation is skipped. Finally, compared with IMPRESS, which
splits KV cache into chunks, and not only loads important
tokens, but also unimportant tokens in each chunk to fast de-
vice, EVICPRESS only puts KV cache that maximize the total
utility function scores on fast device.
In summary, EVICPRESS achieves much higher cache hit
rate in CPU DRAM, as shown in Figure 9, compared to base-
lines that apply the same compression methods and LRU-
based eviction on all contexts and IMPRESS. On the other
hand, as shown in the right hand side of the figure, the cache
hit rate on local SSD for EVICPRESS is lower than other base-
lines, which illustrates that most of the cache hit tokens reside
on CPU DRAM, providing much faster loading delay than
baselines.
We acknowledge that the improvement of EVICPRESS de-
pends on the sizes of KV cache for different LLMs. When the
KV cache is small, DRAM can hold most tokens, leaving little
room for improvement. For example, the MoE model Qwen3-
30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 has a small KV cache (0.0915 GB
per 1K tokens), while a smaller dense model such as Llama-
3.1-8B-Instruct has 0.12GB KV cache per 1K tokens, so even
with a conservative compression ratio, most of the KV cache
can be stored in CPU DRAM, leading to low TTFT.
6.3
Microbenchmarks
The effect of periodic update: Figure 10 evaluates our
periodic-profiling mechanism (§4.3) using real timestamps
from the Azure inference trace [46]. As Azure inference
trace does not include the concrete content of the request,
we use the request we generated (described in §4.3) instead.
EVICPRESS then performs profiling when the discrepancy
between the profiled quality and the predicted quality of the
query decoded with the stored KV cache exceeds 0.3.
We illustrate the time series of using periodic profiling
versus not in Figure 10:
• The figure above shows how the quality gain of using peri-
odic profiling versus not evolves over time. From this figure,
we can see that the quality gain increases gradually over
time and eventually saturates at around 11%, because peri-
odic profiling allows EVICPRESS to use up-to-date profile
to make near-optimal compression decision, while the pro-
file of not doing periodic update gradually gets outdated and
result in lower accuracy under the same storage resource
budget.
• The figure below shows how the end-to-end latency of
requests of EVICPRESS vaaries over time. We can see that,
EVICPRESS has higher end-to-end latency in the periodic
profiling intervals (the red intervals) in average, because
periodic profiling requires GPU resources and slow down
the execution of existing requests. That said, the quality
improvement brought by periodic profiling (about 10%)
still justifies its cost.
Different context needs different eviction-compression
configurations: Figure 11 visualizes the distribution of se-
lected eviction-compression configurations. We observe that
the system indeed makes use of a diverse set of compression
configurations, indicating that a large search space is not only
necessary but actively exploited. We highlight two insights:
• KV caches on disk actually requires higher compression
ratio in average compared to KV caches on CPU. This
is because KV caches on disk are slower to read, which
requires EVICPRESS to further compress the KV caches to
reduce their loading time.
• We note that, though keydiff generally outperforms snapkv
(which in turn outperforms knorm), yet a non-negligible
portion of KV caches still adopts snapkv due to context-
specific benefits.
Improvements across heterogeneous contexts: Figure 12 il-
lustrates the TTFT — Average score trade-off of EVICPRESS
and baselines across different subtasks of longbench dataset.
We draw two conclusions:
• EVICPRESS has higher improvement on tasks that corre-
sponds to shorter contexts (e.g., multi_news and qasper).
This is because, in order to achieve higher CPU cache hit
rate, EVICPRESS puts shorter contexts in CPU instead of
longer ones, so that the CPU can fit into the KV caches of
10


0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0
10
20
# KV cache under 
each comp. rate
CPU
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
0
20
40
SSD
no comp.
keydiff
snapkv
knorm
0
10
20
# KV cache under 
each comp. method
keydiff
snapkv
no comp.
0
50
100
150
200
Figure 11: Distribution of selected compression methods and
compression rates across CPU and SSD storage tiers under
α = 1 with Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3. EVICPRESS actively
uses a broad combination of configurations, validating the
need for a large search space.
more requests.
• EVICPRESS improves the performance for 11 out of 12
tasks. The only exception is on musique, where EVIC-
PRESS performs slightly worse than the keydiff with LRU
eviction baseline.
7
Related Work
KV cache reuse and eviction systems: Storing and reusing
KV cache across multiple requests has been a critical fo-
cus in the design of high-performance LLM serving sys-
tems. This includes paged memory management in GPU,
such as vLLM [24] and SGLang [60]. However, this line of
work suffers from low cache hit rate when the request ar-
rival rate is high and the number of concurrent users is large,
since GPU memory only has limited space (40 to 80 GB
for A100 or H100 GPUs). Thus, more work is proposed to
evict KV cache that cannot fit in GPU memory to lower-tier
storage devices, such as CPU DRAM [26,29,52,60], local
disks [22,29,56], and even remote disks [22,29]. For example,
LMCache [21,29] reuses splits each KV cache into multiple
chunks, and optimizes the loading speed from CPU/disks to
GPU memory with high-performance CUDA kernels; Moon-
cake [37] and InstInfer [34] optimizes the loading bandwidths
across different GPU clusters and performance of prefill-
decode disaggregation; IMPRESS applies fine-grained token-
level eviction, which uses a subset of attention heads to de-
termine important tokens from the KV cache, and evicts non-
important ones to lower-tier storage [5,50]. However, this line
of work only applies different eviction schemes on KV cache,
not even considering combining with compression schemes
to achieve higher cache hit rates.
KV cache compression: To achieve higher cache hit rate,
many works have explored orthogonal methods to compress
KV caches to reduce memory footprint. Token dropping
methods drop less important tokens from the KV cache,
either based on attention scores or learned importance sig-
nals [6,38,59]. Quantization methods reduce the size of KV
cache by using fewer bits to represent each KV cache element,
including adaptive quantization where different layers are ap-
plied with different levels of quantization [17,31] and uniform
quantization [32]. Similarly, this line of work only consid-
ers the possibility of compression, without combining it with
eviction, even when the quality drop is high. Another line
of work applies different levels of compression considering
the error sensitivity of each context [7,51]. However, it does
not consider per-context sensitivity difference to the problem
of joint optimization between eviction and compression as
EVICPRESS does.
Faster LLM serving: Another complementary line of work
speeds up LLM serving by better scheduling to reduce the
bubbles across different inference stages (e.g., prefill, decode
or tool-calling) [1,8]; prefill-decode disaggregation to place
the prefill and decode phases to different GPUs to reduce
SLO violation rate [36,61]; speculative decoding approaches
which proposes using a smaller, faster draft model to propose
a sequence of future tokens, and using the larger target model
to verify the tokens in parallel [25,33]; and chunked-prefill to
enable piggy-backed decoding and reduce memory consump-
tion of prefill [1]. This line of work is complementary and
orthogonal to EVICPRESS, and can be combined with EVIC-
PRESS to further increase the efficiency of LLM inference.
Other KV cache related optimizations: There are a lot of
other works that optimize KV cache in LLM inference, includ-
ing non-prefix KV cache sharing with approximation [14,54],
cross-LLM KV cache reusing with partial layer recompu-
tation [30], request routing that is aware of KV cache lo-
cation [43], improving paged attention for multi-modality
models with different shapes of KV cache [44], and managing
KV cache for sparse-attention models [4]. While this line of
work also makes KV cache in LLM inference more practical
in multiple use cases, EVICPRESS is complementary to them
as they jointly optimize eviction and compression.
8
Limitations and future work
Deployment scope and assumptions: EVICPRESS targets a
common and challenging deployment scenario with limited
GPU and CPU memory and a multi-tier storage hierarchy,
where KV caches routinely contend for capacity, and eviction
or compression decisions concretely affect end-to-end latency
11


0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average score
2wikimqa
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
gov_report
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
hotpotqa
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
multi_news
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average score
multifieldqa_en
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
musique
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
narrativeqa
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
qasper
0.0
0.2
0.4
Average TTFT (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average score
qmsum
0.0
0.2
Average TTFT (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
samsum
0.0
0.1
0.2
Average TTFT (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
trec
0.0
0.2
0.4
Average TTFT (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
triviaqa
keydiff+LRU-based eviction
prefill
knorm+LRU-based eviction
ours
snapkv+LRU-based eviction
Figure 12: EVICPRESS’s consistently improves TTFT-quality trade-off on different datasets. Among these datasets, EVICPRESS
has better improvement on shorter contexts (such as multi_news and qasper).
and quality. In settings with abundant DRAM (e.g., models
with small KV cache size or workloads where all KV caches
can be kept in fast memory), the advantage of sophisticated
joint optimization over simpler policies naturally diminishes.
Moreover, when the loading bandwidths for fast and slow
storage devices are similar, EVICPRESS’s benefits of joint
optimization will decrease. Our prototype is evaluated on a
single-node GPU setup. Extending EVICPRESS to multi-node
deployments, cross-GPU cache sharing, highly multi-tenant
environments with strict isolation requirements, and alterna-
tive serving systems and storage hierarchies is an important
direction for future work.
Adapting to changing loading bandwidth: EVICPRESS
currently assumes that the bandwidth of each storage tier is
known and relatively stable over the time at which we profile
and re-profile configurations. When the available bandwidth
changes more rapidly than our re-profiling frequency or when
bandwidth fluctuations are strongly correlated with bursty
query arrivals, the precomputed utility function scores could
temporarily deviate from the true quality-latency trade-offs
and lead to suboptimal decisions. As part of our future work,
we plan to extend EVICPRESS to react more quickly to band-
width shifts, incorporate richer online telemetry, and co-design
bandwidth-aware profiling and scheduling policies.
Extending to a richer set of compression methods: In the
evaluation section, EVICPRESS selects compression meth-
ods from three methods that drop important tokens from KV
cache to shrink its memory footprint. EVICPRESS can be
easily extended to choose from KV cache quantization meth-
ods [16,17,32]. Similarly, we can build a profiling configura-
tion pool that combines both token dropping and quantization,
and adapts the fraction of tokens to be dropped and the num-
ber of bits used to represent each KV element.
9
Conclusion
We present CacheServe, a caching system for large language
model inference workload that co-designs compression and
eviction policies under hierarchical storage devices to achieve
better quality-delay tradeoff. CacheServe’s core innovation
lies in its capability to jointly exploit the benefit of both evic-
tion and compression, by defining a utility function and se-
lecting the compression-eviction that maximizes such utility.
We implement our system on top of production level LLM
serving engine (vLLM) and cache engine (LMCache). Our
evaluations across diverse models and datasets demonstrate
that CacheServe significantly reduces average Time-To-First-
Token by 1.43 to 3.77× with equivalent quality as baselines
or improves quality by 13.58% to 55.40% at the same TTFT.
By designing our forward-compatible architecture for future
KV cache compression and eviction techniques, EVICPRESS
opens up a new dimension for LLM inference optimizations.
12


References
[1] Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan,
Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S. Gulavani, and Ramachandran
Ramjee. Sarathi: Efficient llm inference by piggyback-
ing decodes with chunked prefills, 2023.
[2] Negar Arabzadeh, Amin Bigdeli, and Charles L. A.
Clarke. Adapting standard retrieval benchmarks to eval-
uate generated answers, 2024.
[3] Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu,
Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao Du, Xiao Liu,
Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and
Juanzi Li. Longbench: A bilingual, multitask bench-
mark for long context understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.14508, 2023.
[4] Ziyi Cao, Qingyi Si, Jingbin Zhang, and Bingquan Liu.
Sparse attention across multiple-context kv cache, 2025.
[5] Weijian Chen, Shuibing He, Haoyang Qu, Ruidong
Zhang, Siling Yang, Ping Chen, Yi Zheng, Baoxing
Huai, and Gang Chen. {IMPRESS}: An {Importance-
Informed}{Multi-Tier} prefix {KV} storage system for
large language model inference. In 23rd USENIX Con-
ference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 25),
pages 187–201, 2025.
[6] Yilong Chen, Guoxia Wang, Junyuan Shang, Shiyao Cui,
Zhenyu Zhang, Tingwen Liu, Shuohuan Wang, Yu Sun,
Dianhai Yu, and Hua Wu. Nacl: A general and effective
kv cache eviction framework for llms at inference time,
2024.
[7] Wen Cheng, Shichen Dong, Jiayu Qin, and Wei Wang.
Qaq: Quality adaptive quantization for llm kv cache. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 2542–2550, 2025.
[8] Weihao Cui, Yukang Chen, Han Zhao, Ziyi Xu, Quan
Chen, Xusheng Chen, Yangjie Zhou, Shixuan Sun, and
Minyi Guo. Optimizing slo-oriented llm serving with
pd-multiplexing, 2025.
[9] Alessio Devoto, Yu Zhao, Simone Scardapane, and
Pasquale Minervini. A simple and effective l2 norm-
based strategy for kv cache compression, 2024.
[10] Sabri Eyuboglu, Ryan Ehrlich, Simran Arora, Neel
Guha, Dylan Zinsley, Emily Liu, Will Tennien, Atri
Rudra, James Zou, Azalia Mirhoseini, and Christopher
Re. Cartridges: Lightweight and general-purpose long
context representations via self-study, 2025.
[11] Shaoting Feng, Hanchen Li, Kuntai Du, Zhuohan Gu,
Yuhan Liu, Jiayi Yao, Siddhant Ray, Samuel Shen, Yihua
Cheng, Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, and Junchen Jiang.
Adaptcache: Kv cache native storage hierarchy for low-
delay and high-quality language model serving, 2025.
[12] Harsha R Gaikwad and Arvind W Kiwelekar. A genera-
tive ai-based assistant to evaluate short and long answer
questions. SN Computer Science, 5(5):633, 2024.
[13] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang,
Djordje Jevdjic, Junbo Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu,
and Pengfei Zuo. Attentionstore: Cost-effective atten-
tion reuse across multi-turn conversations in large lan-
guage model serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19708,
52:20–38, 2024.
[14] In Gim, Guojun Chen, Seung seob Lee, Nikhil Sarda,
Anurag Khandelwal, and Lin Zhong. Prompt cache:
Modular attention reuse for low-latency inference, 2023.
[15] Zhuohan Gu, Jiayi Yao, Kuntai Du, and Junchen Jiang.
Llmsteer: Improving long-context llm inference by steer-
ing attention on reused contexts, 2024.
[16] Yefei He, Luoming Zhang, Weijia Wu, Jing Liu, Hong
Zhou, and Bohan Zhuang. Zipcache: Accurate and effi-
cient kv cache quantization with salient token identifica-
tion, 2024.
[17] Coleman Hooper, Sehoon Kim, Hiva Mohammadzadeh,
Michael W Mahoney, Yakun Sophia Shao, Kurt Keutzer,
and Amir Gholami. Kvquant: Towards 10 million con-
text length llm inference with kv cache quantization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18079, 2024.
[18] Bo Jiang, Taolue Yang, Youyuan Liu, Chengming Zhang,
Xubin He, and Sian Jin. Kvcomp: A high-performance,
llm-aware, lossy compression framework for kv cache,
2025.
[19] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing
Yang, and Lili Qiu. Llmlingua: Compressing prompts
for accelerated inference of large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05736, 2023.
[20] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo, Dongsheng
Li, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Longllm-
lingua: Accelerating and enhancing llms in long context
scenarios via prompt compression, 2023.
[21] Junchen Jiang, Yuhan Liu, Zhuohan Gu, Qizheng Zhang,
Chen Wang, Yue Zhu, Ruoyu Qin, Yuwei An, Xiangfeng
Zhu, Kuntai Du, et al. Networking for stateful llm infer-
ence. In Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group
on Data Communication, 2025.
[22] Shuowei Jin, Xueshen Liu, Qingzhao Zhang, and Z. Mor-
ley Mao. Compute or load kv cache? why not both?,
2025.
13


[23] Jang-Hyun Kim, Jinuk Kim, Sangwoo Kwon, Jae W.
Lee, Sangdoo Yun, and Hyun Oh Song. Kvzip: Query-
agnostic kv cache compression with context reconstruc-
tion, 2025.
[24] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying
Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonza-
lez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory man-
agement for large language model serving with pagedat-
tention, 2023.
[25] Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Y. Matias. Fast In-
ference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
[26] Hanchen Li, Qiuyang Mang, Runyuan He, Qizheng
Zhang, Huanzhi Mao, Xiaokun Chen, Alvin Cheung,
Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Continuum: Efficient
and robust multi-turn llm agent scheduling with kv cache
time-to-live, 2025.
[27] Yuhong Li, Yingbing Huang, Bowen Yang, Bharat
Venkitesh, Acyr Locatelli, Hanchen Ye, Tianle Cai,
Patrick Lewis, and Deming Chen. Snapkv: Llm knows
what you are looking for before generation, 2024.
[28] Akide Liu, Jing Liu, Zizheng Pan, Yefei He, Gholamreza
Haffari, and Bohan Zhuang. Minicache: Kv cache com-
pression in depth dimension for large language models,
2024.
[29] Yuhan Liu, Yihua Cheng, Jiayi Yao, Yuwei An, Xiaokun
Chen, Shaoting Feng, Yuyang Huang, Samuel Shen, Rui
Zhang, Kuntai Du, and Junchen Jiang. Lmcache: An ef-
ficient kv cache layer for enterprise-scale llm inference,
2025.
[30] Yuhan Liu, Yuyang Huang, Jiayi Yao, Shaoting Feng,
Zhuohan Gu, Kuntai Du, Hanchen Li, Yihua Cheng,
Junchen Jiang, Shan Lu, Madan Musuvathi, and Esha
Choukse. Droidspeak: Kv cache sharing for cross-llm
communication and multi-llm serving, 2025.
[31] Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Kuntai Du, Jiayi Yao, Yihua
Cheng, Yuyang Huang, Shan Lu, Michael Maire, Henry
Hoffmann, Ari Holtzman, et al. Cachegen: Fast context
loading for language model applications. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.07240, 2023.
[32] Zirui Liu, Jiayi Yuan, Hongye Jin, Shaochen Zhong,
Zhaozhuo Xu, Vladimir Braverman, Beidi Chen, and
Xia Hu. Kivi: A tuning-free asymmetric 2bit quanti-
zation for kv cache. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02750,
2024.
[33] Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao
Cheng, Zeyu Wang, Rae Ying Yee Wong, Zhuoming
Chen, Daiyaan Arfeen, Reyna Abhyankar, and Zhihao
Jia. SpecInfer: Accelerating Generative LLM Serving
with Speculative Inference and Token Tree Verification.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09781, 2023.
[34] Xiurui Pan, Endian Li, Qiao Li, Shengwen Liang,
Yizhou Shan, Ke Zhou, Yingwei Luo, Xiaolin Wang,
and Jie Zhang. Instinfer: In-storage attention offloading
for cost-effective long-context llm inference, 2024.
[35] Junyoung Park, Dalton Jones, Matthew J Morse,
Raghavv Goel, Mingu Lee, and Chris Lott. Keydiff: Key
similarity-based kv cache eviction for long-context llm
inference in resource-constrained environments, 2025.
[36] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka
Shah, Íñigo Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini.
Splitwise: Efficient generative llm inference using phase
splitting, 2024.
[37] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Mingxing Zhang,
Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. Moon-
cake: A kvcache-centric disaggregated architecture for
llm serving, 2025.
[38] Ziran Qin, Yuchen Cao, Mingbao Lin, Wen Hu, Shixuan
Fan, Ke Cheng, Weiyao Lin, and Jianguo Li.
Cake:
Cascading and adaptive kv cache eviction with layer
preferences, 2025.
[39] Siddhant Ray, Rui Pan, Zhuohan Gu, Kuntai Du, Shaot-
ing Feng, Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, Ravi Netravali,
and Junchen Jiang. Metis: Fast quality-aware rag sys-
tems with configuration adaptation. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Principles, pages 606–622, 2025.
[40] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sen-
tence embeddings using siamese bert-networks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 11 2019.
[41] Mohammad Shahrad, Rodrigo Fonseca, Inigo Goiri, Go-
har Chaudhry, Paul Batum, Jason Cooke, Eduardo Lau-
reano, Colby Tresness, Mark Russinovich, and Ricardo
Bianchini. Serverless in the wild: Characterizing and
optimizing the serverless workload at a large cloud
provider. In 2020 USENIX annual technical conference
(USENIX ATC 20), pages 205–218, 2020.
[42] Woomin Song, Seunghyuk Oh, Sangwoo Mo, Jaehyung
Kim, Sukmin Yun, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo Shin. Hi-
erarchical context merging: Better long context under-
standing for pre-trained llms, 2024.
[43] Vikranth Srivatsa, Zijian He, Reyna Abhyankar, Dong-
ming Li, and Yiying Zhang. Preble: Efficient distributed
prompt scheduling for llm serving, 2024.
14


[44] Dezhan Tu, Danylo Vashchilenko, Yuzhe Lu, and Pan-
pan Xu.
Vl-cache: Sparsity and modality-aware kv
cache compression for vision-language model inference
acceleration, 2024.
[45] Zhongwei Wan, Ziang Wu, Che Liu, Jinfa Huang, Zhi-
hong Zhu, Peng Jin, Longyue Wang, and Li Yuan. Look-
m: Look-once optimization in kv cache for efficient
multimodal long-context inference, 2024.
[46] Yuxin Wang, Yuhan Chen, Zeyu Li, Xueze Kang, Yuchu
Fang, Yeju Zhou, Yang Zheng, Zhenheng Tang, Xin He,
Rui Guo, Xin Wang, Qiang Wang, Amelie Chi Zhou,
and Xiaowen Chu. Burstgpt: A real-world workload
dataset to optimize llm serving systems, 2025.
[47] Jerry Wei, Da Huang, Yifeng Lu, Denny Zhou, and
Quoc V. Le. Simple synthetic data reduces sycophancy
in large language models, 2024.
[48] Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu,
Nathan Hu, Jie Huang, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng, Ruibo
Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, and Quoc V. Le. Long-form
factuality in large language models, 2024.
[49] Colin White, Samuel Dooley, Manley Roberts, Arka Pal,
Ben Feuer, Siddhartha Jain, Ravid Shwartz-Ziv, Neel
Jain, Khalid Saifullah, Sreemanti Dey, Shubh-Agrawal,
Sandeep Singh Sandha, Siddartha Naidu, Chinmay
Hegde, Yann LeCun, Tom Goldstein, Willie Neiswanger,
and Micah Goldblum.
Livebench: A challenging,
contamination-limited llm benchmark, 2025.
[50] Zhiqiang
Xie, Ziyi
Xu, Mark Zhao, Yuwei
An,
Vikram Sharma Mailthody, Scott Mahlke, Michael Gar-
land, and Christos Kozyrakis. Strata: Hierarchical con-
text caching for long context language model serving.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18572, 2025.
[51] Jing Xiong, Jianghan Shen, Fanghua Ye, Chaofan Tao,
Zhongwei Wan, Jianqiao Lu, Xun Wu, Chuanyang
Zheng, Zhijiang Guo, Min Yang, Lingpeng Kong, and
Ngai Wong. Uncomp: Can matrix entropy uncover spar-
sity? – a compressor design from an uncertainty-aware
perspective, 2025.
[52] Yi Xiong, Hao Wu, Changxu Shao, Ziqing Wang, Rui
Zhang, Yuhong Guo, Junping Zhao, Ke Zhang, and
Zhenxuan Pan. Layerkv: Optimizing large language
model serving with layer-wise kv cache management,
2024.
[53] Jingbo Yang, Bairu Hou, Wei Wei, Yujia Bao, and Shiyu
Chang. Kvlink: Accelerating large language models via
efficient kv cache reuse, 2025.
[54] Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yi-
hua Cheng, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu, and
Junchen Jiang. Cacheblend: Fast large language model
serving for rag with cached knowledge fusion, 2025.
[55] Bohan Yu and Yekun Chai. Evolkv: Evolutionary kv
cache compression for llm inference, 2025.
[56] Huawei Zhang, Chunwei Xia, and Zheng Wang.
Kvswap: Disk-aware kv cache offloading for long-
context on-device inference, 2025.
[57] Xinrong Zhang, Yingfa Chen, Shengding Hu, Zihang
Xu, Junhao Chen, Moo Khai Hao, Xu Han, Zhen Leng
Thai, Shuo Wang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun.
∞bench: Extending long context evaluation beyond
100k tokens, 2024.
[58] Yanqi Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Gohar Irfan Chaudhry, Ro-
drigo Fonseca, Sameh Elnikety, Christina Delimitrou,
and Ricardo Bianchini. Faster and cheaper serverless
computing on harvested resources. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, pages 724–739, 2021.
[59] Zhenyu Zhang, Ying Sheng, Tianyi Zhou, Tianlong
Chen, Lianmin Zheng, Ruisi Cai, Zhao Song, Yuandong
Tian, Christopher Ré, Clark Barrett, et al. H2o: Heavy-
hitter oracle for efficient generative inference of large
language models. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 36, 2024.
[60] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Jeff
Huang, Chuyue Sun, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Chris-
tos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al.
Efficiently programming large language models using
sglang. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07104, 2023.
[61] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu,
Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. Dist-
serve: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for goodput-
optimized large language model serving. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.09670, 2024.
[62] Xiabin Zhou, Wenbin Wang, Minyan Zeng, Jiaxian Guo,
Xuebo Liu, Li Shen, Min Zhang, and Liang Ding. Dy-
namickv: Task-aware adaptive kv cache compression
for long context llms, 2025.
[63] Jianian Zhu, Hang Wu, Haojie Wang, Yinghui Li, Biao
Hou, Ruixuan Li, and Jidong Zhai. Fastcache: Opti-
mizing multimodal llm serving through lightweight kv-
cache compression framework, 2025.
15


A
Pseudo Code for Algorithm
Algorithm 1: Policy Optimizer
Input: Incoming KV Cache that needs to be stored i (size of
the kv cache li, quality function Qi(compression ratio)),
Storage queue T, Current Occupied size ST, Storage
memory size C
Output: List of operations on KV Cache: [( KV Cache i,
compression ratio ri, operation oi)]
1: ri ←argmaxQi(r)
2: T.append(i,ri)
3: L.append((i,ri,insert))
4: ST = ST +sizeof(li ∗ri)
5: while ST > C do
6:
j,r,o,←KV Cache in T with the least utility drop
operation and the operation.
7:
if o == compress then
8:
S = ST −Tj ∗(rj −r)
9:
else if o == evict then
10:
r ←0
11:
S = ST −(Tj ∗rj)
12:
end if
13:
L.append((j,r,o))
14: end while
15: return L to executor.
16
