Efficient Remote KV Cache Reuse with GPU-native Video Codec
Liang Mi1∗† Weijun Wang2∗Jinghan Chen1 Ting Cao2‡ Haipeng Dai1‡ Yunxin Liu2
1 Nanjing University 2Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
ABSTRACT
Remote KV cache reuse fetches KV cache for identical con-
texts from remote storage, avoiding recomputation, acceler-
ating LLM inference. While it excels in high-speed networks,
its performance degrades significantly in bandwidth-limited
scenarios. Recent studies address this by transmitting KV
caches in compressed form, but the associated heavyweight
decompression counteracts the KV reuse benefits. In this
paper, we propose an efficient and widely deployable remote
KV cache reuse solution that leverages GPU-native video
codecs. Our system, KVCodec, enables effective KV cache
coding with two techniques. The codec-friendly tensor lay-
out compresses the KV cache in a highly compact video
format, enabling fast transmission. The efficient KV fetcher
orchestrates the transmission, decoding, and restoration of
compressed KV caches in an efficient pipelined manner, elim-
inating resource contention, masking network fluctuations,
and achieving minimum time-to-first-token (TTFT). We pro-
totype KVCodec on diverse GPUs from high- to low-end. Ex-
periments reveal that it reduces TTFT by up to 3.51× while
maintaining lossless accuracy, compared to SOTA methods.
1
INTRODUCTION
With context window trending to millions of tokens, Large
Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated superiority in
many modern services. By ingesting informative contexts,
including system prompts [14], retrieved documents [12, 23],
and interaction histories [18, 19, 67, 81], together with re-
quest queries, LLMs can generate high-quality outputs pow-
ering diverse applications, from code generation [22, 32, 55]
to agentic workflows [33, 63, 72]. For efficient serving, stor-
ing the intermediate states, KV cache, during LLM inference
has become a de facto choice.
KV cache reuse further amortizes the computational costs
across multiple requests. It persists KV caches in the first
inference and reuses them when future requests share com-
mon prefixes. Most LLM inference systems [1, 13, 30, 39,
40, 54, 73, 79] today integrate KV cache reuse as their key
feature. Their consensus is that KV caches are frequently
reused. Mooncake [54] claims that 50% of KV caches will be
reused in KiMi’s real-world workloads, while LMCache [13]
∗Liang Mi and Weijun Wang contributed equally to this work.
†This work was done while Liang Mi interns at the Institute for AI Industry
Research (AIR), Tsinghua University.
‡Corresponding author: Ting Cao and Haipeng Dai.
(a) CacheGen: decompre-
ssion with CUDA cores
(b) ShadowServe: offload 
decompression to SmartNIC
(c) Ours: leverage free 
GPU-native codec 
SmartNIC
GPU
NVDEC
NVENC
Global
Memory
General-
Purpose Cores
Costly!
NVDEC
NVENC
Global
Memory
GPU
Cost-free &
Interference-Free!
NIC
CPU
General-
Purpose Cores
NIC
NVDEC
NVENC
CPU
GPU
Interference!
General-
Purpose Cores
Global
Memory
KV Cache
Figure 1: Solutions of remote KV cache reuse. Our KVCodec
exploits GPU-native video codecs, delivering the best cost-
efficiency and system performance.
believes this number is higher. Despite this benefit, the stor-
age cost of KV caches can be huge [40, 68]. Storing 80K-token
KV caches (e.g., Amazon’s annual report) of a medium-level
34B model can consume up to 19GB of storage [46]. For this
reason, hosting all reusable KV caches locally is impractical.
To tackle this, KV cache reuse uses external storage and
fetches them on demand from remote resources. Mooncake
abstracts all GPU memory, host memory, and disks within
GPU clusters into a disaggregated KV cache pool, and LM-
Cache leverages dedicated storage servers. In such distributed
setups, KV caches must be transmitted over the network. Al-
though high-speed interconnections (e.g., RDMA) render
transmission latency negligible [43, 54, 58, 80], economic
considerations drive modern LLM services to deploy on mid-
range GPUs typically paired with only constrained band-
widths, tens of Gbps or less [24, 38, 48–50, 68].
Recent studies [46, 68] mitigate this networking bottle-
neck by transmitting KV caches in compressed form rather
than raw tensors. It indeed yields bandwidth savings, but
the associated decompression latency lies on the critical
path of LLM inference, counteracting the network bene-
fits. CacheGen [46] customizes a CUDA kernel to acceler-
ate decompression, yet it competes for GPU resources with
LLM inference engines, as the blue box shown in Fig.1(a),
severely degrading LLM inference performance (§2.2). Shad-
owServe [68] achieves interference-free inference by offload-
ing decompression to SmartNIC, as shown in Fig.1(b); but,
the prohibitive hardware cost hinders its widespread adop-
tion. We believe KV cache compression is promising, but
requires a cost-efficient redesign to be widely used.
Modern GPUs are typically equipped with dedicated hard-
ware for efficient video coding. Although initially designed
1
arXiv:2602.09725v3  [cs.DC]  12 May 2026


for media processing, their independent on-chip computing
and storage units offer a great opportunity to address the
above limitations (§2.3). More importantly, as dashed boxes
shown in Fig.1, they are completely idle throughout the LLM
inference. Motivated by this, we ask: Can we implement a KV
cache codec with GPU-native video codecs, enabling efficient
remote KV cache reuse? A concurrent study, llm.265 [71], at-
tempts to compress KV caches by video coding, but cannot be
the answer to this question. It provides very limited compres-
sion gain and lacks system co-design with inference engines
(§2.4). To be the answer, we must tackle two challenges.
First, to minimize transmission delay, efficient remote KV
cache reuse necessitates highly compact compression. Dur-
ing compression, it must map KV tensors to a video format
and encode them into bitstreams using video encoders. How-
ever, this is non-trivial. A successful compression strategy
must comprehensively explore and judiciously exploit both
the distribution of K and V values and the characteristics of
the video coding, to maximize the compression ratio without
compromising LLM generation quality. Blindly representing
the KV tensor as individual video frames and directly encod-
ing them into the bitstream, like llm.265 [71], results in both
suboptimal compression ratios and generation quality (§2.4).
Second, to minimize the Time to First Token, TTFT, only
compact compression is not enough. It just accelerates the
transmission of single video chunks, but efficient remote KV
reuse still requires considerate scheduling as well as rapid
and interference-free decoding and restoration∗. Existing KV
cache reuse systems [13, 54] hardly meet these requirements.
First, their schedulers indiscriminately batch all arriving
requests, leading to non-reuse requests (requests without re-
mote KV cache reuse) being blocked by the fetching stage of
requests with remote reuse. Second, their bulk KV restoration
consumes excessive memory from LLM inference engines, de-
laying the TTFT. And last, their ill-considered design hardly
copes with the networking jitter (§2.4).
In this paper, we present KVCodec, an efficient remote KV
cache reuse module powered by GPU-native video codecs,
to address the challenges outlined above.
To address the first challenge, we propose a codec-friendly
tensor layout that enables a tenfold compression ratio with-
out a drop in LLM inference accuracy. Its core idea is to skip
the lossy Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) and quantiza-
tion steps of video encoding, and fully utilize the lossless
intra- and inter-frame redundancy elimination capability. To
achieve this, we conduct an in-depth analysis of the char-
acteristics of video coding, the distribution of KV values,
the properties of LLM architectures, and finally obtain the
∗This paper follows the same setting as prior studies [46, 54, 68], where the
KV caches are chunked and compressed in advance, and stored at remote
storage nodes. So remote KV reuse (a.k.a., KV fetching) consists of KV
transmission, decoding, and restoration.
layout principle: slice KV tensors along the token dimension,
scatter resulting tensors over continuous frames, and encode
them in multiple-resolution versions (more in §3.2).
To tackle the second challenge, we propose an efficient
remote KV fetcher (§3.3) including three key techniques. The
fetching-aware scheduler (§3.3.1) discriminates the requests
w./w.o KV reuses and isolates the KV fetching in the back-
ground, preventing blocking the inference of non-reuse re-
quests. The adaptive-resolution KV fetching (§3.3.2) adjusts
the video resolution to tune the video size, enabling effi-
cient KV fetching across varying network bandwidths. The
frame-wise tensor restoration minimizes the memory cost
of restoring decoded frames to original KV tensors, without
impacting LLM inference engines.
We summarize our key contributions as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to identify
the opportunity of GPU-native video codecs for remote KV
cache reuse to accelerate LLM inference.
• We prototype KVCodec, an efficient remote KV cache
reuse system powered by GPU-native video codecs. It in-
volves two core techniques, codec-friendly tensor layout and
efficient remote KV cache fetching.
• We implement KVCodec and conduct evaluations on
three GPUs from high- to low-end and three different size
models from 7B to 70B over 1-40Gbps bandwidths. Experi-
mental results show that KVCodec achieves 1.52-3.51× TTFT
reduction compared to SOTA methods, while ensuring high
accuracy and interference-free non-reuse requests inference.
This work does not raise any ethical issues.
2
MOTIVATION AND CHALLENGES
2.1
Preliminary of Remote KV Cache Reuse
LLM inference contains two phases. The prefilling phase pro-
cesses the entire input tokens simultaneously to generate the
first output token, while the decoding phase generates the
subsequent ones in an autoregressive manner. For efficiency,
LLM inference engines store intermediate tensors, i.e., the
KV caches produced by each attention layer, to eliminate
the redundant computation of autoregressive generation.
Although KV cache significantly speeds up decoding, it pro-
vides no acceleration for the prefilling phase.
KV cache reuse operates as a storage-for-computation
trade-off, substantially reducing prefilling latency. Its core
principle is that KV caches generated by one request can be
reused by subsequent requests sharing a common sequence
prefix. This pattern is highly prevalent across modern LLM
applications. For example, to maintain consistency, chat-
bots [28, 29, 36, 76] feed conversation histories into the LLM
at each chat round; in multi-agent code debuggers [7, 53, 72],
2


Context
LLM
Network
1st 
token
Compressed 
KV cache
KV cache
Decmpression
Figure 2: Current three prefilling types: full prefill, raw KV
reuse, compressed KV reuse. Their time costs are: prefill,
transmission+prefill, transmission+decompression+prefill.
web-search agents frequently reread buggy code from cod-
ing agents to find related posts on the Internet; and Vision-
Language-Action (VLA) models [41, 45, 56] in embodied AI
continuously recall prior observations and actions to boost
the quality of the next action. Since this repeated content
can be leveraged after the first processing, LLM inference
engines [39, 79] persist their KV caches, rather than imme-
diately freeing them, to facilitate future reuse.
Remote KV cache reuse significantly extends the ca-
pacity of reusable KV cache by retrieving them from remote
resources. In large-scale LLM services [1, 26, 46, 54, 68], since
the limited capacity of single node and the strategies of load-
aware [21, 35] and fairness-aware [57] request dispatching,
reusable KV caches are typically scattered across distant
nodes. To reuse these KV caches in this distributed envi-
ronment, LLM inference engines must fetch them from the
source nodes via the network interconnect. However, remote
KV cache reuse is only beneficial when the KV cache fetch-
ing speed exceeds the latency of recomputation. Early LLM
serving systems [43, 54, 58] could easily achieve this bene-
fit, as they were commonly deployed in High-Performance
Computing (HPC) centers with >100Gbps RDMA intercon-
nects. In contrast, for cost efficiency, modern serving sys-
tems [20, 31, 49, 68] tend to be deployed on mid-range or
even low-end GPUs, which communicate over bandwidth-
limited networks with tens of Gbps or less. Some other sys-
tems [1, 24] rent dedicated storage servers to scale the ca-
pacity of reusable KV caches, yet their performance is still
limited by constrained bandwidth (19 Gbps on AWS [2]).
2.2
Limitations of Existing Remote KV Cache Reuse
Systems
To mitigate the network bottleneck, SOTA systems [46, 68]
transmit KV caches in compressed forms. While theoret-
ically beneficial, our empirical analysis reveals that these
bandwidth savings yield only a limited end-to-end latency
reduction (as elaborated shortly). To explore the reason, we
benchmark the TTFT of three approaches, as shown in Fig.2:
(1) Full Prefill (baseline without KV reuse), (2) Raw KV Reuse
(e.g., Mooncake [54], AIBrix [1]), and (3) Compressed KV Reuse
(e.g., CacheGen [46], ShadowServe [68])†, as illustrated in
†These transmission-oriented methods leverage aggressive arithmetic cod-
ing to encode KV caches into bitstreams, which are orthogonal to prior KV
Context Length (k)
Basic Text Tasks
Doc. QA /
Short Video Ustd.
Needle in a Haystack /
Long Video Ustd.
Regular Cloud Server
RDMA Based
Bandwidth (Gbps)
Raw KV Reuse
Full Prefill
Existing
Compressed 
KV Reuse
Ours
Figure 3: “Winning areas” of three prefilling types under var-
ious bandwidths and context lengths. KVCodec significantly
extends the applicable scope of compressed KV reuse.
Avg
P95
P99
0
10
20
30
Prefill Time (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Decode Time (s)
Prefill w/o decmp.
Prefill w/ decmp.
Decode w/o decmp.
Decode w/ decmp.
Figure 4: Concurrent LLM in-
ference and KV decompres-
sion cause extra delay.
0.0
0.5
1.0
SM
Infer.+Decmp.
Only Infer..
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Time (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
BW
Prefill 
finished  
Figure
5:
Kernel
switch
yields SM underutilization
and memory I/O contention.
Fig.2. The evaluation is conducted on a 200k-context-window
LWM-7B [74] model served by vLLM [40] on 2 NVIDIA H20
GPUs. Requests arriving follow the real-world trace [64],
and network bandwidth is regulated from 1 to 40 Gbps over
TCP and 100/200 Gbps over RDMA. As shown in Fig. 3, the
“winning area” of the existing compressed KV reuse solution
(dashed box) is surprisingly small for three reasons.
Limited TTFT gains due to suboptimal compression.
Both ShadowServe and CacheGen treat KV tensors as generic
byte streams and compress them with arithmetic coding,
resulting in a low compression ratio. Such a compression
strategy entirely ignores the unique distribution of K and V
data (§3.2), rendering the reduced transmission time unable
to amortize the substantial decompression delay and thus
poor TTFT in most bandwidth-context-length scenarios.
Severe resource contention of CUDA-based decom-
pression. CacheGen customizes a CUDA kernel to accel-
erate the decompression of KV caches. It truly decreases
decompression time but causes a significant LLM inference
delay, resulting in a 50% increase in prefilling time and a 20%
increase in decoding time, as shown in Fig. 4. This stems
from two factors. (i) Compute preemption: Fig.5 profiles the
Streaming Multiprocessors (SM) and GPU I/O bandwidth
utilization of standalone LLM inference versus concurrent
cache compression methods (e.g., pruning [52, 78] or quantization [34, 47])
that keeps tensor formats for GPUs directly use.
3


Cmpressed KV
Original KV
GPU Memory
Time
2.7x peak mem. 
than original KV
Extra memory
Figure 6: Peak memory of decompression in CacheGen is
2.7× that of the raw KV cache.
Default / QP0
llm.265
Lossless / Ours
Lossy
Inter-frame
Prediction
DCT +
Quant.
Entropy
Coding
CacheGen & 
ShadowServe
Intra-frame
Prediction
Figure 7: Standard H.265 encoding pipeline. Default and QP0
apply all steps to KV tensors while Lossless skips lossy steps.
llm.265 [71] skips inter-frame prediction. CacheGen [46] and
ShadowServe [68] only utilize arithmetic coding.
with decompression. Compared to standalone (blue curve),
concurrency triggers frequent kernel context switching (the
fluctuation of the red curve), leading to SM underutiliza-
tion, high memory I/O contention, and thus delaying the
LLM inference. (ii) Memory bloat: CacheGen’s decompres-
sion seizes a considerable amount of GPU memory from LLM
inference engines. As shown in Fig.6, it pre-allocates 5.5GB
of GPU memory, 2.7× larger than the original KV cache,
to decompress only 4K tokens. This ill-considered memory
management limits the batch size of LLM inference, further
increasing the average inference time.
Prohibitive deployment costs of SmartNIC-based de-
compression. To avoid GPU contention, ShadowServe of-
floads KV cache decompression to SmartNICs. It isolates the
decompression from LLM inference but introduces signifi-
cant deployment costs (>$3000 of each NVIDIA BlueField
NIC) and hardware dependencies. These constraints limit
the scalability and adoption of ShadowServe. In line with the
current trend of deploying LLM inference systems on eco-
nomical platforms, this paper aims to develop a cost-efficient
and easy-deployed solution.
2.3
Opportunity of GPU-native Video Codec
Modern GPUs are typically equipped with dedicated ASIC
units, e.g., NVIDIA’s NVENC/NVDEC [5], AMD’s AMF [3],
and Intel’s QSV [4], for efficient video coding. Despite being
designed for video, their on-chip computing and storage
resources, which are totally independent of general-purpose
computing units, offer us a good chance. More importantly,
current LLM inference engines (e.g., vLLM [40], SGLang [79])
completely ignore these resources, leaving them fully idle
during inference, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
90
100
Ours
QP0
llm.265
Loss-
less
CacheGen
ShadowServe
0
5
10
15
20
Compression Ratio
20
40
            Accuracy
Default
Better
Figure 8: Current solutions
yield an unsatisfactory trade-
off between accuracy and
compression.
ϖυ2
퐷ϡυ1
ϖυ1
I
ϔ1ϔ2
Trans.
Decod.+Restore
Inference
Layer-wise async 
fetching and 
inference.
ϖϧ2
퐷ϧ2
퐷ϧ1
ϖϧ1
ϋϧ1
ϋϧ2
ϖϧ3
퐷ϧ2
ϋϧ3
LMCache
Mooncake
Chunk-wise sync fetching 
then inference. 
② Resource      
   waste
 ϔ1 w/ reuse  
ϔ2 w/o reuse 
ϯ3
ϯ2
ϯ1
ϯ0
① ϔ2 is batched with ϔ1 and 
delayed by ϔ1’s fetching procedure
퐷ϡυ2
Fetching procedure
Figure 9: SOTA KV manage-
ment systems deliver ineffi-
cient KV fetching on regular
(non-RDMA) networks.
Offloading KV cache compression and decompres-
sion to GPU-native video codecs opens up a new design
space for remote KV cache reuse. It presents a valuable oppor-
tunity to address the limitations of existing methods. (i) Video
codecs exploit spatial and temporal redundancies of images
(tensors), offering the potential to achieve superior compres-
sion ratios beyond generic AC methods. (ii) Offloading to
independent hardware isolates the workload, effectively elim-
inating the compute preemption and memory bloat, enabling
interference-free simultaneous inference and KV decompres-
sion. (iii) As ubiquitous components on modern GPUs, this
ASIC provides a scalable solution with zero additional hard-
ware cost. While llm.265 [71], a concurrent study, also at-
tempts to compress KV caches with video coding, it fails to
fully exploit the compression potential of video codecs and
lacks co-design with LLM inference engines (§2.4).
2.4
Challenges of Compressed KV Streaming with
GPU-native Video Codec
Building an efficient remote KV cache reuse system using
GPU-native codec hardware involves two challenges.
C1: Difficult accuracy-compression tradeoff. To min-
imize transmission latency, the system must maximize the
compression ratio while guaranteeing the inference accuracy.
However, naively encoding KV tensors with video codecs
results in a suboptimal tradeoff. To demonstrate this, we com-
pare three SOTA methods CacheGen [46], ShadowServe [68],
and llm.265 [71], against three encoding configurations ap-
plied on KV tensors‡ as illustrated in Fig.7: (1) Default (stan-
dard NVENC settings), (2) QP0 (set quantization parameter
as zero), and (3) Lossless (bypassing the lossy steps).
As shown in Fig.8, all these methods fail to balance accu-
racy and compression ratio. (i) Lossy step destroys accuracy.
Default, QP0, and llm.265 achieve high compression ratios
‡All three configurations first pad (nn.ZeroPad2d) KV cache in
[𝑁, 32, 32, 128] shape, then reshape (torch.reshape) it to [𝑁, 256, 176, 3],
i.e., 𝑁of [256, 176, 3] video frames, lastly encode them into video in H.265
via NVENC.
4


with DCT and quantization, but suffer from accuracy drops.
This is because of the different sensitivity of high-frequency
information between human eyes and LLM inference. The
high-frequency values imperceptible to human eyes and
smoothed out by DCT and quantization typically correspond
to activation outliers in LLMs, which act as critical attention
sinks or salient features that contain essential information
for accurate inference [25, 69]. (ii) The Lossless yields low
compression ratios. While preserving accuracy, Lossless con-
figuration only delivers a comparable compression ratio to
CacheGen and ShadowServe. This implies it fails to exploit
the inter- and intra-frame compression gain§, degenerating
into a simple entropy coder. We attribute this failure to the
naive mapping from KV tensors to video frames, which dis-
rupts the inherent spatial-temporal redundancies (more in
§3.2). Crucially, this result misled llm.265 to conclude that
KV tensors lack temporal similarity and incorrectly discard
the inter-frame prediction step as shown in Fig.7.
C2: Inefficient remote KV fetching. While compact
compression enables fast transmission of video chunks, effi-
cient KV fetching remains a challenge. Naively integrating
video codecs into existing remote KV reuse systems [13, 54]
fails to meet this goal as three reasons. (i) Scheduling inter-
ference (HOL Blocking). The schedulers of current systems
naively orchestrate the fetching requests with normal ones
(e.g., 𝑅1 with 𝑅2 in Fig.9) in one batch. This fetching-agnostic
policy severely blocks non-reuse requests from inference,
increasing the TTFT. (ii) Pipeline stalls and hardware under-
utilization. As shown in Fig.9, LMCache’s inference-blocking
fetch policy leaves GPU compute resources idle until receive
all KV cache. Mooncake boosts the efficiency by a layer-wise
fetching-inference pipeline. But, it still wastes resources be-
cause it lacks mechanisms to handle the networking jitter
(e.g., the longer T𝑙2 in Fig.9 when bandwidth drops) and un-
derutilizes decoding hardware (i.e., <20% NVDEC utilization
under Fig.9 setting). (iii) KV restoring memory contention.
LMCache and Mooncake restore original KV tensors from
compressed form at chunk granularity. This coarse-grained
design causes sudden memory spikes (e.g., 2GB per chunk,
details in §3.3.2), which contend with the inference memory
access, worsening the TTFT.
3
KVCODEC DESIGN
KVCodec is an efficient remote KV cache reuse solution that
enables KV coding with GPU-native codec hardware by ad-
dressing the above challenges. We first provide an overview
of KVCodec, then describe the core techniques it leverages.
§Video encoder exploits spatial and temporal redundancy through intra-
and inter-frame prediction, eliminating them when pixels can be accurately
predicted from neighboring pixels or reference frames, storing only the
residual between the actual pixels and the prediction.
LLM 
Inference 
Engine
General-
Purpose 
Cores
Scheduler
Remote 
Storage
Backend 
(Moon-
cake, 
Redis, ...)
Paged 
Memory
KV Manager (LMCache)
Serving Node
KVCodec
Video Codec HW.
Cache Engine
Efficient KV Decomp-
ression (§3.3.2)
Engine (vLLM)
Transfer Engine
Codec-friendly KV
Compression (§3.2)
Fetch-aware Scheduler
（§3.3.1）
Net
Figure 10: KVCodec overview.
3.1
System Overview
KVCodec integrates three modules into the original KV cache
manager, as shown in Fig.10. Fetching-aware scheduler (§3.3.1)
collaborates with the LLM inference engine, distinguishes
the requests that need remote KV caches, and instructs the
cache engine for KV fetching. KV decompression (§3.3.2),
triggered by the scheduler, fetches video chunks from remote
storage nodes, rapidly decodes them to video frames, restores
the frames to the original KV caches, and writes them into
the paged memory of the LLM engine for inference. KV com-
pression ingests the KV tensors from the inference engine,
reshapes them to a codec-friendly tensor layout (§3.2), and
encodes them into videos. These KV videos are delivered
to storage servers or stored in the local KV cache pool and
registered as reusable. KV compression and decompression
execute in the background, transparent to inference engines.
KVCodec follows the same setup as prior studies [46, 54, 68],
where KV caches are chunked and encoded offline.
3.2
Codec-friendly KV Compression
To minimize the transmission delay, KV caches must be
compressed in a highly compact format. The typical com-
pression gain of video encoding comes from the lossless
redundant image content elimination and the lossy numeri-
cal approximation. To ensure LLM generation quality, KV-
Codec skips lossy steps while aiming to fully leverage loss-
less redundancy elimination. To this goal, it necessitates
an appropriate mapping to map the KV cache with shape
[𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛,𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟,ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚,ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚], as shown the left in Fig.13, to
video format with shape [𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒,ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡,𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ, 3] as the right
in Fig.13, allowing it to be encoded in a minimum size.
However, the simple mappings deliver very low compres-
sion ratios. For example, map KV cache to 𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟/3 number of
video frames with shape [𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙, 3] (where 𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙=
ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚× ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚) like llm.265, i.e., slice the KV cache in
Fig.13 horizontally and serve every three continuous layers
as one frame, and encodes them to H.265 bitstream, yielding
only 58% of ours compression ratio. Similarly, slicing the KV
5


cache along the token dimension, i.e., vertically in Fig.13, as
in CacheGen, delivers only 42% of ours.
To maximize the compression ratio, we propose a codec-
friendly tensor layout comprising two stages. In inter-frame
layout (§3.2.1), it determines how to split the KV cache and
where to place the resulting tensors on each frame to expose
the most redundancy that video encoding can leverage. In
intra-frame layout (§3.2.2), it searches for the optimal tensor
shape and inner-tensor element permutation to achieve the
maximum compression ratio.
3.2.1
Inter-frame layout. To guide the inter-frame lay-
out, we first analyze the characteristics of the KV cache and
video encoding, deriving three observations.
(i) Slicing KV cache along token dimension yields the highest
image similarity. To identify the axis providing the most re-
dundancy, we slice the KV cache along each dimension, treat
sequential slices as consecutive frames, and evaluate their
visual similarity with SSIM and PSNR¶. As shown in Fig.11,
token dimension yields the highest similarity scores. We at-
tribute this to the architectural properties of LLM. Modern
LLMs’ causal self-attention injects information from preced-
ing tokens into the subsequent ones, which makies them
blend with each other; and the similar positional encoding
of neighboring tokens further brings them closer.
(ii) Placing a set of tensors over multiple frames delivers
more compression gain than on one single frame. As shown in
Fig.12(top), given four consecutive tensors sliced from the KV
cache, serving them as four consecutive frames and encoding
them into a video yields a 1.6× compression gain compared
to stitching them in a single frame. This benefit stems from
the differential compression nature of video encoding. When
stitching into a single frame, each pixel block (tensor) can
only refer to boundary pixels from its adjacent left and upper
blocks (e.g., the red lines in Fig.12(top)), which wastes many
referable opportunities within the blocks. In contrast, when
serving the tensors as four consecutive frames, the pixel
block can refer to all pixels in its predecessors, resulting in a
higher compression ratio.
(iii) Compression ratio is sensitive to the video resolutions.
It seems we can easily serve each tensor as a video frame to
minimize video size and transmission delay; however, such
a video cannot be decoded (144P is the smallest feasible res-
olution for NVDEC). As shown in Fig.12(bottom), while the
video size increases with higher resolution as more tensors
are stitched into a single frame, the decoding efficiency also
benefits. Given this complex relationship, video resolution
should be carefully set.
¶Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) and Peak Signal to Noise Ratio
(PSNR) are the most widespread metrics to measure similarity of two images.
The evaluation result of PSNR and visualization is detailed in Appx A.1.
With these observations in mind, inter-frame layout obeys
two principles. (1) Slice KV cache along the token dimension
and place the token-adjacent tensors onto continuous frames
(observations (i) and (ii)), constructing the maximum tem-
poral redundancy. (2) Encode videos in multiple-resolution
versions. Runtime can adaptively select the sweet-spot res-
olution that minimizes TTFT (observation (iii)), balancing
transmission and decoding time (§3.3.2).
Following these two principles, our inter-frame layout
consists of three steps as illustrated in Fig.13. 1) It first di-
vides the KV cache into three-layer chunks and slices them
along the token dimension; each chunk contains 𝑇tensors,
each with shape [1, 3,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙]. 2) 𝑇tensors in each chunk,
e.g., the dashed box in Fig.13, are sequentially partitioned
into 𝑇
𝐹groups, each containing 𝐹tensors. 3) Adjacent ten-
sors in each group are placed at identical positions across
consecutive 𝐾frames, and the best tensor layout is deter-
mined with intra-frame layout. Such an inter-frame layout
maintains the spatial alignment of consecutive token tensors,
enabling the encoder to predict each tensor by referencing
its temporal predecessor (green arrows in Fig.13), thereby
maximizing temporal redundancy. Moreover, the three lay-
ers (lowest similarity in Fig.11) are mapped to independently
coded color channels (YUV/RGB).
3.2.2
Intra-frame layout. After slicing the KV cache into
three-layer token tensors and placing them in the appro-
priate locations, our next goal is to determine the mapping
of remaining ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚(H) and ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚(D) dimensions. Keep-
ing the original tensor layout without adjustment, e.g., the
[1, 3,ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚×ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚] as shown the upper left in Fig.14, can
only deliver an 8.7× compression ratio, much smaller than
our ultimate 11.9×. Therefore, we must search for the best
intra-frame layout to optimize the compression ratio.
We formulate the inter-frame layout as a joint optimiza-
tion problem that couples geometric tiling (tensor reshaping)
with inner-element permutation. It creates a 𝑂(log 𝑁× 𝑁!)
of solution space, 𝑁= 𝐻× 𝐷, where brute-force searching is
intractable. As exemplified in Fig.14, given a (1, 4096) vector
of one-layer tensor, there exists 13 geometric tiling times
4096! permutation solutions. Enumerating such a huge num-
ber of possibilities and evaluating the video size of each is
impossible.
To reduce the search space, we follow three rules deriving
from the characteristics of LLM architecture.
Rule (i): Do not exchange the elements from different atten-
tion heads. In LLMs, each attention head captures a unique
semantic feature. Exchanging elements between one head
and another disrupts this semantic information. It breaks the
similarity among continuous tokens and inter-frame predic-
tion, leading to a large residual. Our experimental results
6


Key
Value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SSIM ( better)
.87
.23
.64.62
.56
.14
.39.36
token
layer
head num
head dim
Figure 11: Similarity analy-
sis of slicing KV cache along
different dimensions.
Scatter them on 
4 frames (10KB)
Stitching 4 tensors 
in 1 frame (16KB)
Only refer 
to adjacent 
pixels
Refer to 
all pixels 
in tensors
Figure 12: Tensor encoding
of diverse placement (top)
and resolutions (bottom).
𝐹
Apply intra-
frame layout
(§3.2.2)
Height
Video format
[𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒, ℎ𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡, 𝑤𝑖𝑑𝑡ℎ, 3]
3. Place consecutive tensors at 
identical location across 
consecutive F frame
Groups (
𝑇
𝐹)
1
2
...
...
3
Layer
Token
...
...
KV cache
[token, 𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟, ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚, ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚]
Tensors (𝑇)
1. Divide into 3-layer 
chunks and slice along 
token
2. Partition each 
chunk to F
groups
Figure 13: Inter-frame layout splits the KV cache into tensors and
distributes them onto video frames to create the most temporal redun-
dancy. The layout of each tensor is in §3.2.2.
(32, 128)
(8, 512)
...
Reshape      (8 ∗1, 4 ∗128)
Map 3 layers 
to the RGB 
channels.
ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚∗ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚
...
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑1
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑31
𝐹𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒(8, 512, 3)
(ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚, ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚)
Exchanging elements 
across heads cause 
compression ratio 
degradation.
( 8, 4 , 1, 128 )
×
×
Rule (i)
Rule (ii)
(1, 4096)
𝐻𝑒𝑎𝑑0
3
Figure 14: Intra-frame layout searches for the optimal map-
ping for the tensor providing the max compression ratio.
demonstrate that exchanging 50% of elements across 32 atten-
tion heads results in a 2.4× degradation in compression ratio.
According to this, we isolate the element permutation across
attention heads and separately consider ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚and ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚,
as (1, 4096) to (32, 128) shown in Fig.14. It eliminates enumer-
ating all 4096! permutation, reducing the entire searching
space from 𝑂(log 𝑁× 𝑁!) to 𝑂((log𝐻× 𝐻!) × (log 𝐷× 𝐷!)).
Rule (ii): Keep the order of elements within the attention
head. As the attention head serves as the fundamental seman-
tic unit of LLMs, elements within a head jointly represent a
specific feature. Disarranging the elements of the attention
head disrupts its structured feature correlations, hindering
intra-frame prediction. In our experiments, exchanging 50%
of elements in the attention head increases the 17% size of
intra-predicted frames. For this reason, we preserve the inner-
head element order, which omits the elements permutation
of each attention head and reduces the searching space from
𝑂((log𝐻× 𝐻!) × (log 𝐷× 𝐷!)) to 𝑂((log𝐻× 𝐻!) × log 𝐷.
Rule (iii): Arrange the order of attention heads as initial.
Since distinct heads extract independent semantic features
without an explicit order, their relative positions have a
negligible impact on compression. Our empirical studies
demonstrate that random head orders yield only <0.3% of
size variation. Accordingly, we do not permute the atten-
tion heads but solely search the geometric tiling of ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚,
which ultimately reduces the search space to very limited
𝑂(log𝐻× log 𝐷). As shown in Fig.14, it only requires evaluat-
ing the compression ratio of log 32×log 128 = 35 possibilities.
A
Bitstream 
buffer
A
Resolution
Adapter
Decoding 
Pool
NVDEC
NVDEC
NVDEC
NVDEC
NVDEC
waiting_
for_KV
Fetching-aware Scheduler
Async KV fetching
Original inference logic
Remote Storage
Fetch Controller
Running queue
B
Waiting queue
A
B
C
C
Figure 15: Control flow of KV fetching. Fetching-aware sched-
uler discriminates the requests. Fetch controller isolates the
KV fetching procedure.
Based on the principles above, the optimal layout con-
verges to only a few dozen options. Since all these principles
depend solely on the model architecture and video encoding,
namely being input-agnostic (more in §5.3), we can search
for the best layout offline. Spending only 1.5 hours, we obtain
the best layouts (8, 512), (8, 128), and (16, 64) for all three
models used in this paper, LWM-7B, Yi-34B, and Llama-70B,
As exemplified in Fig.14, the ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑛𝑢𝑚and ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑚of LWM-7B
are reshaped to (8, 4) and (1, 128), and then further reshape
to (8, 512). Lastly, three (8, 512) matrices from each layer are
batched into a (8, 512, 3) tensor.
3.3
Efficient Remote KV Fetching
To minimize TTFT, we propse three key techniques, enabling
KVCodec efficient remote KV cache fetching.
3.3.1
Fetching-aware scheduler. Existing remote KV
reuse systems batch requests without discrimination, caus-
ing requests with remote KV fetch to block the inference of
non-reuse requests (§2.4). To tackle this, KV fetching must be
isolated from the inference engine’s main execution flow. We
propose a fetching-aware scheduler that enables asynchro-
nous KV fetching, avoiding blocking non-reuse requests.
As shown in Fig.15, our scheduler imports a dedicated
queue, waiting_for_KV, to manage fetching requests. It is lo-
cated outside the LLM inference engine and collaborates with
the original queues. In each iteration, the scheduler distin-
guishes the fetching requests, moves the eligible ones (e.g., re-
quest A) from the waiting queue into the waiting_for_KV
7


CPU
Packet Parser
Video Parser
On-chip Memory
Host Memory
NIC
Entropy 
Decoder
NVDECs
GPU 
Bitstream Buffer
Intra/Inter
Predictor
KV Tensor 
Restoration
Reference 
frames
< 70MB
Global Memory
Paged Memory
Decompress Buffer
Raw video 
frames
Net
Transmission
Decoding
Restoration
Figure 16: Dataflow of KV fetching, consisting of KV video
transmission, KV video decoding, and KV tensor restoration.
queue, and notifies the fetch controller to start fetching their
KV caches in the background. The non-reuse requests (e.g., B
and C) still follow the original logic of LLM inference engine,
entering the running queue for immediate inference. Once
fetching completes, the fetch controller asks the scheduler to
dequeue request A from waiting_for_KV queue to running
for immediate execution in the next iteration. Benefiting
from this design, the inference engine remains unaffected
by KV fetching, maintaining its non-reuse or user-defined
scheduling policy and computation.
3.3.2
Efficient KV Decompression. Remote KV fetching
consists of three phases, involving multiple hardware devices.
During the transmission phase, the resolution adapter in
Fig.15 specifies the KV video chunk, fetches it from remote
storage, and stores it in the bitstream buffer in host memory
(see Fig.16). During the decoding phase, the decoding pool,
each instance combined with an NVDEC unit, ingests video
chunks and decodes them to frames. Lastly, the restoration
module restores decoded frames to original KV tensors and
writes them to the paged memory of LLM inference engines.
Adaptive resolution KV fetching. To minimize TTFT,
we employ a pipelining mechanism to overlap transmission
and decoding (restoration naturally overlaps with decod-
ing, elaborated shortly). However, this is non-trivial for two
reasons. First, the transmission and decoding efficiency ex-
hibit opposite characteristics. While transmission favors low-
resolution videos (e.g., 240P in observation (iii) of §3.2.1), it
fails to saturate the block-parallel (64×64 pixels) decoding
units [59], incurring 1.3× higher decoding latency than 1080p
as the table shown in Fig. 17. Second, the entire KV fetch may
take dozens of seconds, during which network conditions
are very likely to fluctuate. Static video chunk sizes suffer
from dynamic bandwidth, leading to pipeline bubbles.
To remove these bubbles, we propose a bandwidth-aware
resolution adaptation mechanism. Unlike CacheGen, which
pursues transmission efficiency through aggressive quantiza-
tion at the cost of accuracy, our approach adjusts the tensor-
to-frame layout (i.e., resolution) and so the video chunk size,
adapting to dynamic bandwidth without accuracy loss. As
modern GPUs are equipped with abundant NVDECs (e.g., 5
240p(180MB)
480p(205MB) 1080p(256MB)
Decoding
460ms
420ms
350ms
Transmit
466ms
530ms
670ms
Switch from 1080p to 
240p to minimize bubble
Fixed 1080p yields large bubbles
Switch to 480p
Figure 17: Adaptive resolution KV fetching significantly re-
duces the pipelining bubbles between transmission and de-
coding under dynamic bandwidth.
NVDECs per A100), we abstract them into a decoding pool,
as shown in Fig. 15, to simultaneously decode multiple video
chunks. Once a decoding instance is idle, one chunk is de-
queued from the bitstream buffer for immediate decoding.
Our adaptation mechanism uses a profile-based table-
lookup method to select the optimal resolution for the video
chunk to be fetched. When fetching a video chunk, the resolu-
tion adapter predicts the network bandwidth (for simplicity,
calculated from the last chunk’s transmission delay), tra-
verses the transmission latency for all resolutions, estimates
decoding delay by table look up, and then selects the opti-
mal resolution that delivers the minimum bubble (Appx.A.2
details pseudo code and complete lookup tables). To make
it concrete, Fig.17 illustrates an example. Before fetching
the 2nd chunk, the bandwidth degrades from 6 to 3 Gbps.
Resolution adapter estimates the transmission delay for all
resolutions, looks up their decoding times (as shown in the
table), and selects the optimal 240p that delivers the small-
est 6ms bubble. Four chunks later, bandwidth increases to 4
Gbps, so the adapter switches to 480p. Compared to the fixed
1080p approach, our adaptive-resolution method eliminates
most bubbles, thereby saving 21% in time cost.
Frame-wise KV tensor restoration. During the decod-
ing phase, as illustrated in Fig.16, the entropy decoder de-
composes the bitstream into intra- and inter-frame parts and
stores them into on-chip memory; then, the intra- and inter-
frame predictor reads them out to reconstruct raw video
frames. Due to the limited on-chip memory capacity, inter-
frame prediction typically keeps the reference frames in GPU
global memory, competing with the LLM inference engine.
To achieve interference-free decoding, we propose frame-
wise KV restoration, which minimizes reliance on global mem-
ory via two strategies. (1) With careful tensor layout in KV
compression, the number of reference frames is limited to
less than four frames. This significantly reduces memory
overhead to less than 20MB, even at 2K resolution. (2) Unlike
CacheGen and ShadowServe that restore original KV tensors
in chunks (1.5K tokens per chunk), our approach executes
8


frame-wise. Once a raw video frame is decoded, it is imme-
diately mapped back to the original KV tensors and filled
into the preallocated slots in the paged memory. Some local
cache policies [29, 76] store the original KV tensors in host
memory or disks. We follow the CacheGen and Shadowserve,
filling them into paged memory directly.
We implement this as a callback function, On_frame_probe.
This delivers two-fold advantages. On the one hand, the
callback function can be plugged into the codec, naturally
pipelining with decoding phase. On the other hand, such a
frame-wise restoration brings remarkable memory reduc-
tion to the decompress buffer, from the prior chunk-wise
1.5-2GB to the frame-wise 50MB. Consequently, combining
the memory cost of reference frames, the overall decompress
buffer is less than 70MB. Notably, although On_frame_probe
executes on CUDA cores, it is super lightweight with only a
few reshape operations. The frame-to-tensor mapping are
on-hand encoded in the bitstreams during KV compression.
4
IMPLEMENTATION
We implement KVCodec as a pluggable backend of LM-
Cache(v0.3.7) [13], and use vLLM(v0.10.2) [40] as the LLM
inference engine. The codebase primarily uses Python (v3.12),
and the efficient KV fetcher is partially implemented in C++
and CUDA, totaling ∼5K LOC. (1) The KV compression is
implemented with FFmpeg [8] API interface with NVENC,
and it falls back to CPU encoding when lacking NVENCs.
The encoding follows H.265 with lossless=1 to skip lossy
steps. As with CacheGen, the KV cache is quantized to in-
tegers and encoded into video chunks (each containing 10K
tokens across three layers) in multiple resolutions, before
being registered as reusable. (2) For efficient KV fetching, the
fetching-aware scheduler runs on a standalone thread inte-
grated into LMCache, synchronizing with the vLLM sched-
uler via thread events. Adaptive resolution adaptation is
implemented simply in Python, but for concurrent video de-
coding, all NVDECs are abstracted into a resource pool, with
each instance pinned to an NVDEC for a decoding pipeline
built on GStreamer [9] via nvv4l2decoder. The decoding
pipeline is implemented in C++ and invoked by Pybind11
with py::gil_scoped_release to bypass the Python GIL,
ensuring that decoding does not block the vLLM main loop,
and frame-wise KV tensor restoration is implemented as a
On_frame_probe callback plugged in it, with a customized
Sparse_frame_KV_transfer operator fast write KV tensors
into paged memory. When multiple fetching requests are
routed to a single serving node, KVCodec applies a FCFS pol-
icy if a request consumes the entire bandwidth or GPU mem-
ory; otherwise, it batches concurrent requests and partitions
bandwidth evenly as CacheGen did for their KV fetching.
Compatibility. Since the seamless integration between
LMCache and vLLM, KVCodec maintains full compatibil-
ity with vLLM’s native features. Notably, unlike LMCache’s
blocking inference for fetching, KVCodec follows Moon-
cake’s layer-wise fetching-inference pipelining. It immedi-
ately enqueues fetching requests into vLLM’s running queue,
provided the remaining layers’ fetching time can be hidden
by inference. Thanks to the inherent chunked prefill from
vLLM, the inference time cost can be precisely estimated,
hence eliminating the pipelining bubbles of this layer-wise
design. For more details, please see Appdx.A.3.
5
EVALUATION
We evaluate KVCodec on three heterogeneous GPU clusters
with real-world request traces. The key takeaways are:
• KVCodec reduces up to 3.51× TTFT for fetching re-
quests and 77% TTFT and 35.4% TPOT for non-reuse requests.
The performance gains are consistent across diverse models,
GPUs, and network bandwidths. (§5.2)
• Codec-friendly KV compression and adaptive-resolution
KV fetching bring remarkable bandwidth and TTFT sav-
ings, and frame-wise KV tensor restoration guarantees the
interference-free inference. (§5.3)
5.1
Experimental Setup
Models. We evaluate KVCodec on three models of different
sizes and context capabilities: LWM-7B [10] with 1M, Yi-
34B [6] with 200K, and Llama3-70B [11] with 128K.
Datasets. We evaluate KVCodec on three long-context
benchmarks to comprehensively assess performance across
various tasks and context lengths. (1) L-Eval [16] contains
20 closed-ended QA tasks, including 508 long documents
with lengths ranging from 3-200K tokens. (2) LV-Eval [77]
further increases difficulty and mitigates knowledge leak-
age, consists of single-hop and multi-hop QA of distrac-
tion documents, fact confusion, and keyword replacement
with lengths ranging from 16-256K. (3) LongBench-V2 [17]
is the most systematic evaluation that employs a multiple-
choice format to ensure objectivity across single- and multi-
document QA, long-form conversations, coding, and struc-
tured data tasks, with 13-167K context lengths.
Metrics. We compare KVCodec’s accuracy, latency, and
compression ratio with baselines. Accuracy follows the stan-
dard metric of each dataset. For L-Eval and LongBench, it is
the percentage of generated answers that correctly match
the ground truth; for LV-Eval, it is the F1 score, harmonic
mean of precision and recall, between the generated answer
and the ground-truth answer for the QA task. Latency and
compression ratio still follow §2.4.
Baselines. To show the superiority brought by KVCodec,
we compare it with: Full prefill executes the standard LLM
9


10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
TTFT (s)
(a) LWM-7B in 2*L20
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
10
20
30
(b) LWM-7B in 2*H20
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
10
20
(c) LWM-7B in 2*A100
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
TTFT (s)
(d) Yi-34B in 4*L20
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
(e) Yi-34B in 2*H20
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
(f) Yi-34B in 2*A100
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
TTFT (s)
(g) Llama-70B in 8*L20
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
(h) Llama-70B in 4*H20
10
50
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
0
5
10
(i) Llama-70B in 4*A100
CacheGen
Raw KV reuse
Full prefill
Ours
Figure 18: TTFT of the request with remote KV reuse across different context lengths over various devices and models.
inference without any KV cache reuse; Raw KV reuse pulls
the raw KV cache remotely and computes their cross atten-
tion with query prompts; and three Compressed KV reuse
methods, CacheGen, ShadowServe, and llm.265.
Test platform. We test on three GPUs representing differ-
ent market positions, each with a different number of cards,
supporting different model sizes. For high-end NVIDIA A100
(80GB) with 5 NVDECs and mid-range NVIDIA H20 (96GB)
with 7 NVDECs, LWM, Yi, and Llama3 leverage 2, 2, and 4
cards, respectively. For low-end NVIDIA L20 (48GB) with 3
NVDECs, three models utilize 2, 4, and 8 cards.
5.2
End-to-End Performance
This section reports the E2E performance of KVCodec on
various devices. If not specified, all results are tested on H20
with the Yi-34B model over a 16Gbps bandwidth network,
which is typically offered by regular cloud platforms [68].
TTFT saving of requests requiring KV fetching. As illus-
trated in Fig. 18, KVCodec achieves the lowest TTFT for the
fetching request across various hardware and models with
varying context lengths. It outperforms Full prefill, Raw KV
reuse, and CacheGen by 13.63×, 3.51×, and 1.52×, on aver-
age. Full prefill is extremely inappropriate for long-context
LLM serving; the superlinear computational complexity with
context lengths causes unacceptable TTFT. Although raw KV
reuse and CacheGen reuse remote KV caches to mitigate this
heavy computation, their TTFTs are bottlenecked by trans-
mission over regular cloud bandwidth because they lacks
efficient KV compression. In contrast, KVCodec achieves
Avg
90%-tile 95%-tile
0
50
100
1000
2000
TTFT (s)
Ours
CacheGen
Full prefill
(a) TTFT
Avg
90%-tile 95%-tile
0.0
0.6
1.2
1.8
TPOT (s)
Ours
CacheGen
Full prefill
(b) TPOT
Figure 19: KVCodec’s KV fetching provides remarkable TTFT
gain to non-reuse requests. KVCodec also offers TPOT benefit
under PD-aggregated environments.
highly compact KV compression, thereby significantly re-
ducing transmission latency. The most limited speedup, as
shown in Fig. 18 (d) and (g), occurs at serving on the L20
GPUs. This phenomenon arises because L20 has only three
NVDECs, which incur a queue up for decoding, and the
Grouped Query Attention (GQA) used by Yi and Llama gen-
erates a relatively smaller KV cache, which reduces the bene-
fits of our compression. Even so, KVCodec saves remarkable
TTFT for fetching requests.
TTFT & TPOT benefits for non-reuse requests. Beyond
TTFT reduction for fetching requests, KVCodec keeps al-
most interference-free performance for non-reuse requests.
We evaluate this on a real-world request trace [54] with
request arrival rate at 0.2 req/s, and set 40K tokens as the
reuse threshold for KVCodec and CacheGen, i.e., prefill re-
quests with <40K context tokens and reuse remote KV for
10


5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Compression Ratio
0.90
0.95
1.00
Normalized Accuracy
(a) LWM-7B
Better
6
8
10
Compression Ratio
(b) Yi-34B
Better
6
8
10
Compression Ratio
(c) Llama-70B
Better
Ours
CacheGen
ShadowServe
llm.265
LEval
LvEval
LongBench
Figure 20: KVCodec achieves the best accuracy and compres-
sion ratio tradeoff over diverse models and benchmarks.
1
3
6
10
20
40
Bandwidth (Gbps)
20
30
60
100
150
200
Context Length (K)
2.97 2.77 2.12 1.68 1.42 1.23
3.03 2.78 2.14 1.62 1.28 1.25
3.23 3.24 2.67 2.02 1.53 1.51
3.29 3.37 2.85 1.94 1.61 1.57
3.26 3.23 2.70 1.92 1.52 1.46
3.29 3.37 2.85 1.94 1.61 1.57
(a) LWM-7B
1
3
6
10
20
40
Bandwidth (Gbps)
3.49 3.36 2.72 2.14 1.80 1.52
3.50 3.12 2.52 1.93 1.51 1.28
3.50 3.18 2.60 2.03 1.62 1.34
3.44 3.03 2.42 1.79 1.43 1.26
3.46 3.09 2.48 1.86 1.49 1.22
3.44 3.03 2.42 1.79 1.43 1.26
(b) Yi-34B
1
3
6
10
20
40
Bandwidth (Gbps)
3.05 3.21 3.04 2.36 1.61 1.43
3.07 3.17 3.21 2.17 1.45 1.08
3.09 3.22 2.96 2.14 1.53 1.18
3.10 3.14 2.82 2.07 1.38 0.97
2.88 2.97 2.74 1.99 1.35 1.03
2.94 2.98 2.70 1.93 1.29 0.96
(c) Llama-70B
0.9×
2.20×
3.50×
 1.0×
CacheGen Better
Ours Better
Figure 21: Performance comparison between CacheGen and
ours. The value is the ratio of CacheGen’s TTFT ÷ our TTFT.
>40K-token requests. All requests follow the vLLM’s default
First-Come-First-Served (FCFS) policy. As illustrated in Fig.
19(a), KVCodec reduces 77.1% and 98% of TTFT compared to
CacheGen and Full prefill. This stems from a two-fold. For
non-reuse requests orchestrated with fetching requests in a
single batch, KVCodec’s fetching-aware scheduler enables
KV fetching to run in the background, avoiding blocking
the inference of non-reuse requests such as CacheGen and
thereby reducing their TTFT. For non-reuse requests that
arrive but are still in the waiting state, all techniques in KV-
Codec work together, boosting the serving efficiency of run-
ning requests, reducing the waiting time for all requests, and
thus saving significant TTFT. KVCodec also reduce TPOT
by 35.4% and 40% compared to CacheGen and Full prefill.
Full prefill must compute the input contexts for all requests.
Such a large amount of computing workload means vLLM
must always piggyback decoding on prefilling requests, se-
verely delaying their TPOT. Remote KV reuse in KVCodec
and CacheGen eliminates the prefilling workload, allowing
decoding to run in isolation and resulting in low TPOTs.
Moreover, compared to CacheGen’s CUDA-based decom-
pression, which competes for GPU resources, KVCodec’s
codec-based method provides better performance.
High compression ratio without accuracy drop. As shown
in Fig.20, KVCodec achieves the best compression ratio across
all datasets and models while maintaining lossless accuracy.
It improves the compression ratio by 2.17× over CacheGen
and 1.93× over ShadowServe, without accuracy degradation;
LWM-7B Yi-34BLlama-70B
0
6
12
Compression Ratio
quant
quant+inter.&intra.
quant+inter.
Figure 22: Compression ratio
breakdown on three models.
Ours
Ours
w/o Ada.
Cache-
Gen
Full
prefill
0
5
10
15
TTFT (s)
Transfer
Decompress
Compute
Figure 23: TTFT breakdown
across different baselines.
and against llm.265, KVCodec delivers a 12% accuracy en-
hancement alongside 1.41× of compression ratio. The preser-
vation of accuracy is achieved by strictly using the H.265
lossless mode, which bypasses the lossy steps of video en-
coding, and the same quantization method as CacheGen
and ShadowServe. The superior compression performance
stems from a codec-friendly tensor layout that appropriately
maps KV tensors to pixel blocks, thereby maximizing data
redundancy that can be eliminated by video coding.
TTFT comparison of KVCodec v.s. CacheGen. KVCodec
delivers robust performance across a wide range of band-
width and context lengths. We conduct a comprehensive
evaluation of TTFT against CacheGen across 1-40Gbps band-
width and 20K-200K context lengths. Fig. 21 indicates that
under bandwidth constraints of <40 Gbps, KVCodec achieves
an average speedup of 1.29×–3.50× over CacheGen. The per-
formance gain diminishes as the bandwidth increases. This
is because, as bandwidth increases, the arrival rate of the
fetched video chunk exceeds NVDEC’s decoding capacity,
breaking the transmission-decoding pipeline and causing
waiting (more in §5.3). Conversely, CacheGen’s CUDA-based
decompression kernel can leverage all CUDA cores on GPUs
to accelerate decompression; however, this significantly im-
pacts the inference of non-reuse requests, as shown in Fig.19.
Nevertheless, in almost all scenarios, typically under low-
end GPU-paired bandwidth, KVCodec still beats CacheGen
thanks to our careful design.
5.3
Ablation Study
We evaluate the effectiveness of each component in KVCodec
by ablation studies.
Codec-friendly KV compression helps KVCodec achieve
11.9× compression ratio while keeping high accuracy. Fig. 22
breaks down the compression contribution of quantization,
inter-frame layout, and intra-frame layout on all three mod-
els. Compared to quantization, our inter-frame layout achieves
an average compression gain of 2.2×, while the intra-frame
layout further boosts this improvement to 2.96×. Further-
more, compared to LWM-7B and Yi-34B, the proportion of
intra-frame layout in Llama-70B is the largest due to its
fewest attention heads and usage of GQA.
11


Decoding and restoring 
KV cache of 7 concurrent 
video chunks cost only 
400MB GPU memory.
Figure 24: GPU memory cost
of concurrent 7 video chunks.
L20*4
H20*2 A100*2
0
30
60
90
Decoding TPT
(K tokens/s)
Ours
CacheGen
Figure 25: Decoding through-
put on different devices.
Adaptive resolution KV fetching. As shown in Fig. 23,
under the same bandwidth state as Fig. 17, KVCodec reduces
the TTFT to 5.2s, representing a 20% improvement over the
baseline without adaptive resolution. This flexibility allows
KVCodec to handle network jitter without compromising
accuracy, unlike CacheGen’s adaptive quantization level. Fur-
thermore, pipelining transmission and decoding effectively
hides the decoding overhead, resulting in less than 400ms la-
tency per video chunk. And remote KV reuse reduces prefill
computation to under 50ms.
Frame-wise KV tensor restoration. As shown in Fig. 24,
concurrently decoding and restoring KV caches of 7 video
chunks only occupies 400MB of peak GPU memory. Such
marginal overhead does not interfere with vLLM, which
ensures memory safety in long-context scenarios. In particu-
lar, a single KV fetching only needs NVDEC to pre-allocate
40MB for video decoding, and the restoration to reshape and
dequantize with 47MB.
Decoding throughput is typically bottlenecked by avail-
able NVDEC chips. We evaluate this with Yi-34B model on
different platforms. As shown in Fig. 25, KVCodec achieves
27K, 67K, and 47K tokens/s on 4 L20, 2 H20, and 2 A100
platforms. They are only 0.3×, 1.34×, and 0.88× the perfor-
mance of CacheGen. These unsatisfactory results stem from
the hardware specifications: L20 has only 3 NVDECs, while
H20 and A100 have 7 and 5. In contrast, CacheGen relies
on CUDA cores, which can leverage the entire GPU com-
puting resources. Despite unsatisfactory, KVCodec’s overall
performance is much better than CUDA-base CacheGen. We
believe that as researchers recognize the universality of codec
ASICs, next-generation GPUs will overcome these resource
limitations.
6
LIMITATION AND DISCUSSION
Online KV compression is essential for P-D disaggrega-
tion [80], where KV cache must be transmitted between
disaggregated prefilling and decoding nodes, and for fault tol-
erance [27, 60, 62] or instance preemption [50], that migrates
KV cache across nodes. While KVCodec enables compact
KV compression, limited NVENC resources make the KV
compression procedure insufficient to meet runtime require-
ments. We believe that compressed KV reuse is promising
and will support a broader range of runtime scenarios with
the next-generation, powerful NVENC released.
Preallocate GPU memory for fetching requests. Align-
ing with Mooncake and LMCache, KVCodec treats fetching
requests as first-class citizens, preallocating memory for all
KV caches upfront. Although this mechanism likely blocks
the inference of non-reuse requests due to the memory bud-
get, it ensures the timely inference of fetching requests. One
feasible improvement is to store the fetched KV cache in
local storage [37, 51, 70], making room for non-reuse request
inference and swapping them to GPU memory when needed.
We leave this for future work.
7
RELATED WORK
LLM inference engines today employ a bunch of tech-
niques to boost inference performance. Continuous batch-
ing [66, 75] avoids ineffective zero padding by fine-grained
orchestrating prefilling and decoding workloads together for
higher efficiency. Chunked prefill [15, 65] further improves
it to prefill long context in chunks, mitigating execution
bubbles, while prefill-decoding disaggregation [80] isolates
two inference phases, eliminating interference. Paged atten-
tion [40] leverages paged management to eliminate memory
fragmentation, while prefix caching [44, 79] reuses KV cache
across requests to further reduce prefilling cost.
KV cache management becomes increasingly critical
as the context length increases. Beyond the above de facto
paged memory, many studies [28, 29, 36, 76] store KV cache
outside the GPU, leveraging host memory and disks. They
swap the inactive KV cache out and swap it back into the
GPU when needed. Some other methods [61, 69, 78] are
much more aggressive, identifying the cold-spot KV cache
and directly evicting it permanently. KVCodec is orthogonal
to these methods that require maintaining tensor formats
for GPU direct use, but encodes KV caches into bitstreams
to enable efficient cross-node transmission.
Distributed KV cache management further extends
caching capabilities across distributed nodes, to overcome
local memory constraints. Beyond the systems mentioned in
the background, some work [27, 35, 43] proposes granular
paging and prefetching mechanisms to speed up or mask
retrieval delays. To tackle the transmission issue, some ar-
chitectural works [42, 54] explore disaggregated memory
pooling via RDMA, uses zero-copy to bypass CPU during
data transfer. Other work [46, 68] compresses the KV cache
before transmission, whereas KVCodec leverages hardware
video codecs to enable efficient remote reuse of the KV cache.
12


8
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the remote KV cache reuse for LLM
inference. We find that existing methods provide only subop-
timal KV compression and their decompression either com-
petes for inference resources or requires new hardware de-
vices at extra cost. Unlike them, we leverages idle GPU-native
chips and propose KVCodec system. KVCodec contains a
codec-friendly tensor layout that compress KV caches to com-
pact video formats, and an efficient remote KV fetcher that
hides network latency and eliminates resource contention. In
our evaluation across heterogeneous models and hardware,
KVCodec delivers significant speedups in TTFT compared
to SOTA methods while maintaining high accuracy.
REFERENCES
[1] Aibrix: An open-source, large-scale llm inference infrastructure for
system research. https://github.com/vllm-project/aibrix.
[2] Amazon
ec2
instance
types.
https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/
instance-types/?nc1=h_ls.
[3] Amd
advanced
media
framework.
https://gpuopen.com/
advanced-media-framework/.
[4] Intel quick sync video installation. https://www.intel.com/content/
www/us/en/architecture-and-technology/quick-sync-video/
quick-sync-video-installation.html?wapkw=quick%20sync%20video.
[5] Nvidia video codec sdk. https://developer.nvidia.com/video-codec-sdk.
[6] 01-ai/yi-34b.
https://huggingface.co/01-ai/Yi-34B, (Accessed on
02/04/2026).
[7] Cursor - the ai code editor.
https://cursor.com, (Accessed on
02/04/2026).
[8] Ffmpeg, a complete, cross-platform solution to record, convert and
stream audio and video.
https://www.ffmpeg.org/, (Accessed on
02/04/2026).
[9] Gstreamer: open source multimedia framework. https://gstreamer.
freedesktop.org/, (Accessed on 02/04/2026).
[10] Largeworldmodel/lwm-text-chat-1m.
https://huggingface.co/
LargeWorldModel/LWM-Text-Chat-1M, (Accessed on 02/04/2026).
[11] meta-llama/llama-3.3-70b-instruct.
https://huggingface.co/
meta-llama/Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct, (Accessed on 02/04/2026).
[12] Introducing claude 4. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-4, (Ac-
cessed on 07/14/2025).
[13] Lmcache.
https://github.com/LMCache/LMCache, (Accessed on
07/14/2025).
[14] Long system prompts in claude.
https://docs.anthropic.com/
en/release-notes/system-prompts#august-5-2025,
(Accessed
on
08/05/2025).
[15] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-
jee. Taming {Throughput-Latency} tradeoff in {LLM} inference with
{Sarathi-Serve}. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI 24), pages 117–134, 2024.
[16] Chenxin An, Shansan Gong, Ming Zhong, Xingjian Zhao, Mukai Li, Jun
Zhang, Lingpeng Kong, and Xipeng Qiu. L-eval: Instituting standard-
ized evaluation for long context language models. In Proceedings of the
62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 14388–14411, 2024.
[17] Yushi Bai, Shangqing Tu, Jiajie Zhang, Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang, Xin Lv,
Shulin Cao, Jiazheng Xu, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, et al. Longbench v2:
Towards deeper understanding and reasoning on realistic long-context
multitasks. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3639–3664,
2025.
[18] Iz Beltagy, Matthew E Peters, and Arman Cohan. Longformer: The
long-document transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
[19] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai,
Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George Bm Van Den Driessche, Jean-
Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. Improving lan-
guage models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 2206–2240. PMLR, 2022.
[20] Shiyi Cao, Shu Liu, Tyler Griggs, Peter Schafhalter, Xiaoxuan Liu,
Ying Sheng, Joseph E Gonzalez, Matei Zaharia, and Ion Stoica. Moe-
lightning: High-throughput moe inference on memory-constrained
gpus. In ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ACM ASPLOS), 2025.
[21] Shiyi Cao, Yichuan Wang, Ziming Mao, Pin-Lun Hsu, Liangsheng Yin,
Tian Xia, Dacheng Li, Shu Liu, Yineng Zhang, Yang Zhou, Ying Sheng,
Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Locality-aware fair scheduling in llm
serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14312, 2025.
[22] Mark Chen. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[23] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat,
Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan
Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with ad-
vanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation
agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025.
[24] NVIDIA Corporation. Dynamo distributed kv cache manager (nvidia
dynamo sdk v0.2.0). In NVIDIA Corporation, 2025.
[25] Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
Llm.int8(): 8-bit matrix multiplication for transformers at scale. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[26] Tianyu Fu, Zihan Min, Hanling Zhang, Jichao Yan, Guohao Dai, Wanli
Ouyang, and Yu Wang. Cache-to-cache: Direct semantic communica-
tion between large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.03215,
2025.
[27] Yao Fu, Leyang Xue, Yeqi Huang, Andrei-Octavian Brabete, Dmitrii
Ustiugov, Yuvraj Patel, and Luo Mai. {ServerlessLLM}:{Low-Latency}
serverless inference for large language models. In 18th USENIX Sym-
posium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24),
pages 135–153, 2024.
[28] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevd-
jic, Junbo Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. {Cost-
Efficient} large language model serving for multi-turn conversations
with {CachedAttention}. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 24), pages 111–126, 2024.
[29] Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, and Jiwu Shu. Fast state restoration in
llm serving with hcache. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European
Conference on Computer Systems, pages 128–143, 2025.
[30] In Gim, Guojun Chen, Seung-seob Lee, Nikhil Sarda, Anurag Khan-
delwal, and Lin Zhong. Prompt cache: Modular attention reuse for
low-latency inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04934, 2023.
[31] Tyler Griggs, Xiaoxuan Liu, Jiaxiang Yu, Doyoung Kim, Wei-Lin Chi-
ang, Alvin Cheung, and Ion Stoica. M\’elange: Cost efficient large
language model serving by exploiting gpu heterogeneity. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14527, 2024.
[32] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao
Zhang, Guanting Chen, Xiao Bi, Yu Wu, YK Li, et al. Deepseek-coder:
When the large language model meets programming–the rise of code
intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196, 2024.
[33] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng
Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau,
13


Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collab-
orative framework. In The twelfth international conference on learning
representations, 2023.
[34] Coleman Hooper, Sehoon Kim, Hiva Mohammadzadeh, Michael W
Mahoney, Yakun S Shao, Kurt Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. Kvquant:
Towards 10 million context length llm inference with kv cache quanti-
zation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
37:1270–1303, 2024.
[35] Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Xusheng Chen,
Tao Xie, Chenxi Wang, Sa Wang, Yungang Bao, Ninghui Sun, et al.
Memserve: Context caching for disaggregated llm serving with elastic
memory pool. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17565, 2024.
[36] Jinwoo Jeong and Jeongseob Ahn. Accelerating llm serving for multi-
turn dialogues with efficient resource management. In Proceedings
of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, pages 1–15,
2025.
[37] Jiazhi Jiang, Yao Chen, Zining Zhang, Bingsheng He, Pingyi Luo, Mian
Lu, Yuqiang Chen, Hongbing Zhang, Jiangsu Du, Dan Huang, et al.
Efficient kv cache spillover management on memory-constrained gpu
for llm inference. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
37(1):90–105, 2025.
[38] YOUHE JIANG, Fangcheng Fu, Xiaozhe Yao, Guoliang HE, Xupeng
Miao, Ana Klimovic, Bin CUI, Binhang Yuan, and Eiko Yoneki. De-
mystifying cost-efficiency in llm serving over heterogeneous gpus. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2025.
[39] Chao Jin, Zili Zhang, Xuanlin Jiang, Fangyue Liu, Xin Liu, Xuanzhe
Liu, and Xin Jin. Ragcache: Efficient knowledge caching for retrieval-
augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12457, 2024.
[40] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
Efficient memory management for large language model serving with
pagedattention. In 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
(ACM SOSP), 2023.
[41] Mingcong Lei, Honghao Cai, Zezhou Cui, Liangchen Tan, Junkun
Hong, Gehan Hu, Shuangyu Zhu, Yimou Wu, Shaohan Jiang, Ge Wang,
et al. Robomemory: A brain-inspired multi-memory agentic framework
for lifelong learning in physical embodied systems. In NeurIPS 2025
Workshop on Space in Vision, Language, and Embodied AI, 2025.
[42] Nandor Licker, Kevin Hu, Vladimir Zaytsev, and Lequn Chen. Rdma
point-to-point communication for llm systems.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.27656, 2025.
[43] Bin Lin, Chen Zhang, Tao Peng, Hanyu Zhao, Wencong Xiao, Minmin
Sun, Anmin Liu, Zhipeng Zhang, Lanbo Li, Xiafei Qiu, et al. Infinite-llm:
Efficient llm service for long context with distattention and distributed
kvcache. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02669, 2024.
[44] Chaofan Lin, Zhenhua Han, Chengruidong Zhang, Yuqing Yang, Fan
Yang, Chen Chen, and Lili Qiu. Parrot: Efficient serving of {LLM-
based} applications with semantic variable. In 18th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24), pages 929–
945, 2024.
[45] Fanqi Lin, Ruiqian Nai, Yingdong Hu, Jiacheng You, Junming Zhao,
and Yang Gao. Onetwovla: A unified vision-language-action model
with adaptive reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11917, 2025.
[46] Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Yihua Cheng, Siddhant Ray, Yuyang Huang,
Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du, Jiayi Yao, Shan Lu, Ganesh Anantha-
narayanan, et al. Cachegen: Kv cache compression and streaming
for fast large language model serving. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2024 Conference, pages 38–56, 2024.
[47] Zirui Liu, Jiayi Yuan, Hongye Jin, Shaochen Zhong, Zhaozhuo Xu,
Vladimir Braverman, Beidi Chen, and Xia Hu. Kivi: A tuning-free asym-
metric 2bit quantization for kv cache. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02750,
2024.
[48] Ziming Mao, Tian Xia, Zhanghao Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tyler Griggs,
Romil Bhardwaj, Zongheng Yang, Scott Shenker, and Ion Stoica. Sky-
serve: Serving ai models across regions and clouds with spot instances.
In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Sys-
tems, pages 159–175, 2025.
[49] Yixuan Mei, Yonghao Zhuang, Xupeng Miao, Juncheng Yang, Zhihao
Jia, and Rashmi Vinayak. Helix: Serving large language models over
heterogeneous gpus and network via max-flow. In ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ACM ASPLOS), 2025.
[50] Xupeng Miao, Chunan Shi, Jiangfei Duan, Xiaoli Xi, Dahua Lin, Bin Cui,
and Zhihao Jia. Spotserve: Serving generative large language models
on preemptible instances. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 2, pages 1112–1127, 2024.
[51] Xiurui Pan, Endian Li, Qiao Li, Shengwen Liang, Yizhou Shan, Ke Zhou,
Yingwei Luo, Xiaolin Wang, and Jie Zhang. Instinfer: In-storage at-
tention offloading for cost-effective long-context llm inference. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.04992, 2024.
[52] Zhuoshi Pan, Qianhui Wu, Huiqiang Jiang, Menglin Xia, Xufang Luo,
Jue Zhang, Qingwei Lin, Victor Rühle, Yuqing Yang, Chin-Yew Lin, et al.
Llmlingua-2: Data distillation for efficient and faithful task-agnostic
prompt compression. In ACL (Findings), 2024.
[53] Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan
Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for soft-
ware development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924, 6(3):1, 2023.
[54] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing
Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. Mooncake:
Trading more storage for less computation — a KVCache-centric ar-
chitecture for serving LLM chatbot. In 23rd USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (FAST 25), pages 155–170, Santa Clara, CA,
February 2025. USENIX Association.
[55] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai
Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal
Remez, et al. Code llama: Open foundation models for code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
[56] Hao Shi, Bin Xie, Yingfei Liu, Lin Sun, Fengrong Liu, Tiancai Wang,
Erjin Zhou, Haoqiang Fan, Xiangyu Zhang, and Gao Huang. Memo-
ryvla: Perceptual-cognitive memory in vision-language-action models
for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19236, 2025.
[57] Vikranth Srivatsa, Zijian He, Reyna Abhyankar, Dongming Li, and
Yiying Zhang. Preble: Efficient distributed prompt scheduling for llm
serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00023, 2024.
[58] Foteini Strati, Sara McAllister, Amar Phanishayee, Jakub Tarnawski,
and Ana Klimovic. Déjàvu: Kv-cache streaming for fast, fault-tolerant
generative llm serving. In Proceedings of the 41st International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, 2024.
[59] Gary J Sullivan, Jens-Rainer Ohm, Woo-Jin Han, and Thomas Wiegand.
Overview of the high efficiency video coding (hevc) standard. IEEE
Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology, 22(12):1649–
1668, 2012.
[60] Biao Sun, Ziming Huang, Hanyu Zhao, Wencong Xiao, Xinyi Zhang,
Yong Li, and Wei Lin. Llumnix: Dynamic scheduling for large language
model serving. In 18th USENIX symposium on operating systems design
and implementation (OSDI 24), pages 173–191, 2024.
[61] Jiaming Tang, Yilong Zhao, Kan Zhu, Guangxuan Xiao, Baris Kasikci,
and Song Han. Quest: Query-aware sparsity for efficient long-context
llm inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
2024.
14


[62] Alexey Tumanov, Timothy Zhu, Jun Woo Park, Michael A Kozuch, Mor
Harchol-Balter, and Gregory R Ganger. Tetrisched: global reschedul-
ing with adaptive plan-ahead in dynamic heterogeneous clusters. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh European Conference on Computer Systems,
pages 1–16, 2016.
[63] Haoyu Wang, Christopher M Poskitt, and Jun Sun. Agentspec: Cus-
tomizable runtime enforcement for safe and reliable llm agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.18666, 2025.
[64] Jiahao Wang, Jinbo Han, Xingda Wei, Sijie Shen, Dingyan Zhang,
Chenguang Fang, Rong Chen, Wenyuan Yu, and Haibo Chen. Kvcache
cache in the wild: Characterizing and optimizing kvcache cache at
a large cloud provider. In 2025 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 25). USENIX Association, July 2025.
[65] Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yinmin Zhong, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu,
and Xin Jin. Loongserve: Efficiently serving long-context large lan-
guage models with elastic sequence parallelism. In Proceedings of the
ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, pages
640–654, 2024.
[66] Bingyang Wu, Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Shengyu Liu, Fangyue Liu,
Yuanhang Sun, Gang Huang, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. Fast dis-
tributed inference serving for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.05920, 2023.
[67] Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yuyuan Liu, Min Xu, and Yueming Jin. Agentic
reasoning: A streamlined framework for enhancing llm reasoning with
agentic tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04644, 2025.
[68] Xingyu Xiang, Raj Joshi, Yuhan Liu, Jiayi Yao, Chenxingyu Zhao,
Junchen Jiang, Yang Zhou, Eddie Kohler, and Minlan Yu. Shadowserve:
Interference-free kv cache fetching for distributed prefix caching. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.16857, 2025.
[69] Guangxuan Xiao, Yuandong Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike
Lewis. Efficient streaming language models with attention sinks. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[70] Yi Xiong, Hao Wu, Changxu Shao, Ziqing Wang, Rui Zhang, Yuhong
Guo, Junping Zhao, Ke Zhang, and Zhenxuan Pan. Layerkv: Optimizing
large language model serving with layer-wise kv cache management.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00428, 2024.
[71] Ceyu Xu, Yongji Wu, Xinyu Yang, Beidi Chen, Matthew Lentz,
Danyang Zhuo, and Lisa Wu Wills. Llm. 265: Video codecs are se-
cretly tensor codecs. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2025.
[72] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu
Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer
interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 37:50528–50652, 2024.
[73] Lu Ye, Ze Tao, Yong Huang, and Yang Li. Chunkattention: Efficient
self-attention with prefix-aware kv cache and two-phase partition.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.15220, 2024.
[74] Alex Young, Bei Chen, Chao Li, Chengen Huang, Ge Zhang, Guanwei
Zhang, Guoyin Wang, Heng Li, Jiangcheng Zhu, Jianqun Chen, et al.
Yi: Open foundation models by 01. ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04652,
2024.
[75] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and
Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A distributed serving system for transformer-
based generative models. In USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI), pages 521–538, 2022.
[76] Lingfan Yu, Jinkun Lin, and Jinyang Li. Stateful large language model
serving with pensieve. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Con-
ference on Computer Systems, pages 144–158, 2025.
[77] Tao Yuan, Xuefei Ning, Dong Zhou, Zhijie Yang, Shiyao Li, Minghui
Zhuang, Zheyue Tan, Zhuyu Yao, Dahua Lin, Boxun Li, et al. Lv-eval:
A balanced long-context benchmark with 5 length levels up to 256k.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05136, 2024.
[78] Zhenyu Zhang, Ying Sheng, Tianyi Zhou, Tianlong Chen, Lianmin
Zheng, Ruisi Cai, Zhao Song, Yuandong Tian, Christopher Ré, Clark
Barrett, et al. H2o: Heavy-hitter oracle for efficient generative infer-
ence of large language models, 2023.
[79] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff
Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. Sglang: Efficient
execution of structured language model programs. 2024.
[80] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. Distserve: Disaggregating prefill
and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model serving. In
18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implemen-
tation (OSDI 24), pages 193–210, 2024.
[81] Yufan Zhuang, Xiaodong Yu, Jialian Wu, Ximeng Sun, Ze Wang,
Jiang Liu, Yusheng Su, Jingbo Shang, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Bar-
soum. Self-taught agentic long context understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.15920, 2025.
A
APPENDIX
A.1
Additional results of image similarity
Key
Value
16
20
24
28
32
36
PSNR ( better)
33
21
27 27
25
18
24 23
token
layer
head num
head dim
Figure 26: PSNR analysis of slicing KV cache along different
dimensions.
Fig. 26 plots the PSNR value of slicing the KV cache along
different dimensions. The same as SSIM in Fig.11, slicing the
KV cache along token dimensions brings the most image
similarity.
Fig. 27 visualizes the different image similarity levels. We
add different levels of noise to the original picture, leading
to the noised picture having a corresponding SSIM with
the original picture. These SSIM values match the SSIM of
continuous tensors sliced from the KV cache along different
dimensions, e.g., the 0.87 of the token dimension as shown
in Fig.11.
A.2
Algorithm of adaptive resolution and corre-
sponding lookup table
Adaptive resolution fetching algorithm is shown in Alg. 1,
which aims to minimize pipeline bubbles by synchroniz-
ing transmission and decoding stages. Initially, the avail-
able bandwidth ˆ𝐵𝑡is predicted using historical traces B𝑡−1
(line#1). Next, the algorithm iterates through the set of sup-
ported resolutions R𝑎𝑙𝑙to evaluate each candidate 𝑟(line#4).
15


(a) original picture
(b) SSIM=0.87(Token)
(d) SSIM=0.23(Layer)
(c) SSIM=0.62(Head)
Figure 27: Visualization of structural similarity (SSIM) across
different dimensions.
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Resolution Selection via Bubble Min-
imization
Input: Historical Bandwidth B𝑡−1, Current Decompress Pool Load L𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙,
Profile Table T𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓, Support resolution set R𝑎𝑙𝑙
Output: Optimal Resolution 𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑡
1: ˆ𝐵𝑡←EstBandwidth(B𝑡−1)
⊲Predict current BW from history
2: 𝛿𝑚𝑖𝑛←∞
3: 𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑡←NULL
4: for 𝑟in R𝑎𝑙𝑙do
⊲Iterate through all candidate resolutions
5:
𝑆𝑟←GetVideoSize(𝑟)
6:
𝜏𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠←𝑆𝑟/ ˆ𝐵𝑡
⊲Calculate transmission latency
7:
𝜏𝑑𝑒𝑐,𝜏𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦←LookupTable(T𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓,𝑟, L𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙)
⊲Get decoding
latency with switching penalty
8:
𝛿𝑏𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒←|𝜏𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠−𝜏𝑑𝑒𝑐−𝜏𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦| ⊲Calculate the bubble gap
9:
if 𝛿𝑏𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒< 𝛿𝑚𝑖𝑛then
10:
𝛿𝑚𝑖𝑛←𝛿𝑏𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒
11:
𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑡←𝑟
12:
end if
13: end for
14: return 𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑡
In each iteration, the transmission latency 𝜏𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠is estimated
from the predicted bandwidth and video size 𝑆𝑟(line#5-6).
Regarding the decoding latency 𝜏𝑑𝑒𝑐, we query the lookup
table T𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑓based on the current pool load L𝑝𝑜𝑜𝑙(line#7).
The lookup table across different devices is shown in Tab. 1,
Tab. 2 and Tab. 2. Furthermore, we observe that resolution
switching within the pool affects the processing efficiency
of lower-resolution videos. In addition, to account for resolu-
tion switch overheads, a switching penalty𝜏𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑙𝑡𝑦whenever
the candidate resolution differs from the active resolution
in the decompression pool. Finally, the system identifies the
optimal resolution 𝑟𝑜𝑝𝑡that minimizes the bubble 𝛿𝑏𝑢𝑏𝑏𝑙𝑒
between transmission and decompression (line#8-11).
Concurrency
Latency (s)
240P
480P
640P
1080P
1
0.21
0.2
0.2
0.19
2
0.22
0.22
0.21
0.19
3
0.29
0.30
0.29
0.26
4
0.32
0.31
0.30
0.30
5
0.46
0.42
0.37
0.35
6
0.52
0.43
0.41
0.40
7
0.62
0.51
0.45
0.43
Penalty
0.08
0.06
0.03
0
Size (MB)
180
205
235
256
Table 1: Lookup table of different resolutions on H20.
Concurrency
Latency (s)
240P
480P
640P
1080P
1
0.18
0.175
0.17
0.16
2
0.18
0.178
0.175
0.16
3
0.19
0.183
0.175
0.161
Penalty
0.06
0.06
0.04
0
Size (MB)
180
205
235
256
Table 2: Lookup table of different resolutions on L20.
Concurrency
Latency (s)
240P
480P
640P
1080P
1
0.25
0.24
0.231
0.20
2
0.252
0.241
0.235
0.21
3
0.252
0.25
0.24
0.22
4
0.26
0.26
0.25
0.24
5
0.29
0.27
0.27
0.25
Penalty
0.04
0.04
0.03
0
Size (MB)
180
205
235
256
Table 3: Lookup table of different resolutions on A100.
A.3
Layer-wise fetching-inference pipeline.
We propose a layer-wise KV fetching pipeline with a KV
buffer to achieve a non-blocking execution pipeline as shown
in Fig. 28. Following layer-wise pipeline design in Mooncake,
16


Quick start inference by layer-wise 
fetching with KV buffer
Fetched KV
New generated KV
Fetching order
Inference order
Figure 28: Layer-wise KV fetching with KV buffer.
KVCodec also pre-allocates GPU memory that entire KV
cache required, and fill the fetched remote KV cache into
GPU memory in a layer-by-layer manner. To prevent fetching
from stalling non-reuse requests, we maintain a KV buffer to
track the state of each layer’s KV cache. Fetching requests are
added to the running queue only when the pipeline satisfies
following non-blocking condition:
𝑘
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑇(𝑗)
decode ≤
𝑘−1
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑇(𝑗)
comp,
∀𝑘∈{𝐿buf + 1, . . . , 𝐿total}
where 𝑇(𝑗)
decode and 𝑇(𝑗)
comp denote the decoding and computa-
tion time for the 𝑗-th layer, 𝐿buf and 𝐿total denote the buffered
layer number and total layer number. This ensures that for
every unbuffered layer 𝑘, the KV cache data is ready exactly
before the GPU completes the computation of layer 𝑘−1,
thereby preventing any execution stalls. Thanks to the de
facto chunked prefill and sequence parallelism techniques,
the computation time of each layer can be predicted very
precisely.
17
